1 A is the first of the alphabet;$God is the primary force of the world.
2 What is the use of all your learning,$if you can’t surrender yourself at the feet of God.
3 Those who surrender themselves at feet of the one,$who resides in the flower-like hearts of all, will live long and well.
4 Those who surrender at the feet of the one,$who doesn’t have wants or hates, will never have any hassles anywhere.
5 Fate, which impacts those in the darkness of ignorance,$will not impede those who hail the true glory of God.
6 Those who follow the true moral path of the one,$who has doused the desires of the five senses, will last long.
7 Except for those who surrender at the feet of the one, for whom,$there is no simile, it is tough to cure the mental rues.
8 Except those who surrender at the feet of God, the ocean of morality,$others will struggle to cross the ocean of desire.
9 The head that doesn’t bow to God,$is similar to the organs that don’t have the right senses.
10 Those who surrender at the feet of God,$will cross the great ocean of life; others won’t.
11 The world survives because of the rains and therefore$rain is known to be the nectar of immortality.
12 Oh rain! You not only create everything we eat,$you are the indispensable food yourself.
13 If the skies fail to rain, the world,$though surrounded by sea, will yet suffer of hunger.
14 If the monsoons fail,$farmers won’t till their lands to produce food.
15 It is the tormentor; it is the saviour of the tormented:$the rain is everything for us.
16 Unless drops of precious rain fall down,$not even grass will sprout its head.
17 Even the vast ocean will start shrinking,$if the clouds that took the water away from it, don’t pour it back.
18 Special offerings and daily rituals to gods will stop,$if the skies dry up.
19 Charity and penance will both cease to exist in this world,$if the clouds are not charitable.
20 World can’t survive without water$and morality can’t exist without rains.
21 All books willingly conclude as the most excellent,$the greatness of those with the right conduct who have given up attachment.
22 Trying to quantify the greatness of those who have overcome desire$is like counting those who have died till now.
23 The greatness of those who have known the nature of both worlds,$And have eschewed desire to live a righteous life, is most admirable in this world.
24 Using the ankus called resoluteness, one who controls$the elephant named five senses, is sowing for future glory.
25 God, the king of heavens, is an example of$what the ability to conquer one’s five senses can result in.
26 What separates the great from the ordinary$is their ability to do the seemingly impossible.
27 One who has analysed and conquered the urges of$taste, sight, touch, sound and smell, will control this world.
28 The words of those glorious people, who control their minds completely,$become the gospel.
29 Those who have scaled the mountain of morality$will not allow their anger to last for a moment.
30 All (and only) those righteous people, who shower love on all living beings,$can be classified as Anthanar.
31 Righteousness yields good reputation and wealth;$is there anything more precious?
32 Rectitude is the most precious possession;$there is nothing more pernicious than straying from it.
33 Keep doing the morally right things, in every possible manner,$wherever you go.
34 True moral integrity lies in being flawless in your thoughts;$everything else is loud and blatant posturing.
35 Righteousness is all about removing the four flaws –$envy, desire, anger and harmful words.
36 Do the righteous deeds now without waiting for senility to set in;$they will remain your permanent companions then.
37 One man lifting another on a palanquin,$can’t be justified as the fruit of any prior moral deeds.
38 Never let a day pass without a good deed;$it makes this life fulfilling and the next unnecessary.
39 True joy blossoms only due to righteous deeds;$all else cause unhappiness and disrepute.
40 A righteous deed deserves to be done; an evil deed ought to be avoided to$protect oneself from infamy.
41 A good family person is one who supports all three relationships (parents, wife, children)$in a balanced and righteous manner.
42 A good family person also extends support$to saints, poor and needy.
43 Teachers, God, guests, relatives and oneself – it is important$to nurture all these five in addition to the family.
44 One who earns well but avoids the blame of hoarding wealth,$by philanthropy, will lead a complete life with no complaints.
45 If love and virtue pervade the family life, they become$the characteristic and fruit of the family life.
46 The only way to live is to live righteously;$if you set aside virtues, what more is there to gain?
47 One who leads a normal and intimate family life,$is far ahead of those who seek other priorities.
48 If one lives by the right virtues and assists others to do the same,$such a family life is better than the penance of saints.
49 True virtue is to lead a harmonious family life;$it is even better if it is beyond others’ blame.
50 One who lives worldly life the way it ought to be lived$will be treated on par with the Gods inhabiting the heavens.
51 A spouse who possesses virtues required for the family$and spends within the means is the ideal life partner.
52 If your spouse doesnt possess the virtues needed for married life,$whatever else you possess in life is irrelevant.
53 If your spouse has the qualities suited for family life,$what is it that you dont have? If not, what is it that you have?
54 If your spouse is strongly virtuous, can there be$anything worthier that your spouse?
55 A person who respects the spouse more than God$is like rain that pours instantly on demand.
56 A woman not only protects herself, but tirelessly takes care$of her husband and preserves the family reputation.
57 Is it of any use to possess women by imposing physical barriers?$A woman will remain virtuous only on her own volition.
58 If a woman gets a spouse with great character,$she will enjoy the glory of heaven on earth.
59 Those who dont have respectable family lives,$will not be able to stride with a lion-like pride before their opponents.
60 A great harmonious married life is a boon;$having good offsprings adds luster to it.
61 Other than having children who are wise enough to know what needs to be known,$there is no other treasure that I value more.
62 No harm will befell one for even seven births, if one gives birth$to children who have irreproachable character.
63 One’s children are defined as one’s wealth; the wealth that$the children make will be through their own deeds.
64 The porridge stirred playfully with the tiny hands$of one’s children is sweeter than nectar.
65 The tender skin of one’s children is joyous to touch;$their sweet voices rapturous to hear.
66 Only those who don’t listen to their baby’s sweet babble$will claim that a flute or yaazh sounds melodious.
67 The duty of a father towards his children is to give them$a headstart in knowledge over the best of scholars.
68 All living creatures on this earth feel prouder$when their children are smarter than themselves.
69 A mother feels more ecstatic to hear her son being praised$as a noble scholar than when the son was born.
70 The duty of a son towards his father is to make others wonder$what great deeds did the father do to deserve such a son.
71 Can there be a latch to lock in and hide love?$It will reveal itself through tears when a loved one is in trouble.
72 Loveless people hold everything to themselves.$Those who are filled with love bear even their bones for others.
73 Precious life is associated with the body$Since love is associated with the way of life, they say.
74 Love yields affection for all,$which leads to invaluable friendships.
75 The honour for those who found joy in this world$Is the result of leading a life of love, it’s said.
76 The ignorant think that love is needed only for righteous deeds;$they know not that love is an ally for bravery too.
77 A life without love will be stung by the righteous conscience$like a body without bones that is burnt by the sun.
78 A life without love in the heart is as futile$as a dried-up tree blossoming in a desert.
79 What useful things can external body parts do,$if the heart is devoid of love.
80 Only a person who follows the path of love, is in a state of living;$else it is just a skeleton dressed with skin.
81 The purpose of nurturing wealth and leading a family life,$is to be able to be hospitable to guests.
82 Even if you have nectar that will assure immortality,$it is not appreciable to dine alone, leaving the guests out.
83 One who is hospitable to guests everyday$never suffers because of that.
84 The Goddess of wealth will reside happily with someone$who attends to his guests with a smile on the face.
85 Does one even need to sow his field, if he always eats$only what remains after feeding his guests?
86 One who is hospitable to his guests, and when they leave,$awaits his next guests, will be a welcome-guest in the heavens.
87 We can’t quantify the benefits of hospitality; it is limited$only by the quality of the guests.
88 Those who dont take up hospitality as a spiritual ritual,$will later repent that they have lost the wealth they loved.
89 There are fools who choose to be poor despite possessing wealth,$by not being hospitable to guests.
90 The flower, anicham, shrivels when it is smelt. A guest will wilt$if the host’s face betrays the slightest twitch.
91 The words uttered by enlightened scholars will only be$kind words carrying love and no malice.
92 To be someone who speaks sweet words with a smile$is even better than being philanthropic with a happy heart.
93 To look at someone with kindness, to smile at them$and to say pleasant words, is a nice virtue.
94 Painful poverty will not afflict someone who speaks$only pleasant words to everyone.
95 Humility and pleasant words are the true jewels$for anyone and not anything else.
96 If one seeks and speaks pleasant words that cause good all around,$righteousness resides and harm recedes.
97 Speech that is inseparable from sweetness will yield$just-consequences and will reflect right virtues.
98 A sweet word, said without the slightest spite,$will provide delight in this life and the next.
99 Having seen the sweet benefits of pleasant words,$why should one utter harsh words?
100 To say harsh words when you have nice words, is like$plucking an unripe fruit when there are ripe ones.
101 A favour done, not as return for another, is more valuable than$heaven and earth put together.
102 A timely favour, however trivial$its material value is, is invaluable.
103 If we delve into the real impact of a favour,$done without calculating the returns, it is vaster than the ocean.
104 Those who know the true value of a favour, will see$for even the smallest favours, a tree, where they were offered a grain.
105 A favour returned, is not to be based on quantum of favour done,$but on the magnanimity of the person who did the favour.
106 Never forget your ties with a flawless person; never forego the friendship$of those who stood by you during a distress.
107 One would remember the friendship of those who helped overcome a distress, forever,$even if there are seven births.
108 It is not right to forget the help rendered by someone; it is virtuous$to forget any harm, the moment it is done.
109 Even if a person commits murderous injury, it will be overlooked$if he has done one good deed earlier.
110 There is salvation for faltering on any virtue$but not for ingratitude.
111 Position of power is good to occupy, when one practices$impartiality, unfailingly, towards all sections.
112 The wealth of one who has a balanced view, will remain intact$and will last for the next generations.
113 Even if some good comes out of the gains generated by$being unfair, desist from making that gain.
114 Whether a person has been just or unjust in life,$will be ascertained by the nature of offsprings left behind.
115 Ups and downs in life are inevitable; noble scholars are embellished$by not letting their hearts vacillate in either case.
116 When the heart falters to think unfairly, be alerted$that you are on course for ruination.
117 The world will not think ill of one who has stumbled into poverty$because of being fair and righteous.
118 Like a weighing scale that is balanced and sways correctly,$the grace of noble scholars lies in dispassionate assessment.
119 It is righteous to speak words that are not deviant; such words$are a result of unbiased thoughts that are not deviant.
120 Responsible business is when a business-person, caringly,$deploys other people’s money as one’s own.
121 Restraint will result in a place among the divine;$lack of it will lead to utter darkness.
122 Preserve your restraint as you would preserve your wealth;$for humans, there is no treasure more precious.
123 The greatness of one, who is wise and follows the right path$by being restrained, will be recognized and appreciated.
124 The stature of one, who doesn’t diverge from the right path$and remains restrained, will belittle a mountain.
125 Humility is a good quality in everyone; in particular,$for the wealthy, it is like their wealth.
126 If one can restrain his five senses, like a tortoise that retreats into its single shell,$it will be a protection through seven births.
127 You can afford to lose control over anything except your tongue; else$the words that you spit will return to bite you.
128 Even if there is one harm caused by harsh words, all the good$caused by other virtuous deeds will also be seen as evil.
129 A wound caused by fire will heal inside;$a scar caused by the tongue never heals.
130 Virtue will wait for the moment to adorn one, who controls anger,$learns all there is to learn and exercises restraint.
131 Propriety confers prominence; hence, propriety is$cherished more than existence.
132 Take painstaking effort to preserve propriety; after researching all there is to,$one can conclude, it is the best ally.
133 Class is determined by propriety of conduct; impropriety will lead to$being considered part of an ignoble class.
134 One can relearn if he forgets the scriptures; but, a brahmin ceases to be one,$when he strays from his decorum.
135 A person who has envy has no wealth; a person$who has no decorum has no growth.
136 The strong-willed don’t shrivel their propriety,$knowing the suffering inflicted by impropriety.
137 One attains eminence through decorum;$one attains unprecedented infamy due to indecorum.
138 Good conduct becomes the seed for goodwill and$impropriety always yields agony.
139 Those who practice propriety find it impossible$to utter harmful words even forgetfully.
140 Those who don’t learn to abide by the decorous norms of the society,$even if well-read, are unwise.
141 The indiscretion of desiring another’s wife will not be found$in those who are enlightened about virtue and possession.
142 Of all those who have been beyond the boundaries of morality, there are no greater$imbeciles than those who go after another’s wife.
143 A person is not any better than the dead, when he indulges in adultery$with the wife of another who trusts him.
144 What worth is one’s reputation, however big it is,when,$without considering the least bit, he has an affair with another’s wife.
145 One who indulges in adultery with another’s wife, even when it is$easy to do so, will beget a blame that will stay forever.
146 Animosity, sin, fear and vengeance – these four will never leave one$with a liaison with another’s wife.
147 One, who leads a righteous family life, will not$crave the feminine grace of another’s wife.
148 The magnanimous machismo of not coveting another’s wife is, for noble scholars,$an exalted virtue and decent decorum.
149 Whosoever deserves all the good in this world, surrounded by the fearsome ocean, will$never surrender on the shoulders of a woman who belongs to another.
150 Even if one is unrighteous and does many a misdeed, he should, atleast, not fall for the$feminine charm of another’s wife.
151 Like the earth that bears even those who till it, supreme virtue is$to be patient with one’s deriders.
152 One should always tolerate a transgression;$it is even better to forget it.
153 Turning away a guest is the most abject poverty; enduring the excesses$of a moron is the mightiest might.
154 If you want to lead an unabated fulfilling life, you have to$preserve and practice forbearance.
155 One who retaliates is not held in high regard;$one who is patient is precious as gold.
156 Those who retaliate rarely rejoice for a day; the repute of the patient remains$till the end of the world.
157 Even if an untoward evil is done unto you, it is better$not to resent and do an unrighteous deed.
158 Defeat a person who has, out of arrogance,$done you harm, by your forbearance.
159 One who, patiently, bears the harsh words$of a transgressor, is purer than a puritan.
160 Great ascetics who conquer hunger, by fasting, are inferior to$those who patiently endure the harsh words of others.
161 One should make it a righteous way of life,$to hold no envy in his heart.
162 Not being envious of anybody is a rich reward;$there is nothing that can match it.
163 One who, in his envy, doesn’t appreciate the wealth of others,$is known not to value virtue and his own wealth.
164 Those who know of the ills inflicted by envy,$will not do anything evil out of envy.
165 One who feels envious of the wealth given away as charity,$will have even his kin suffer without anything to wear and eat.
166 For destruction to be caused, there is no need for enemies;$if one has envy, it will suffice.
167 Sridevi, goddess of wealth, will despise a jealous person and direct him$to her sister, Moodevi, goddess of poverty.
168 Envy is a damned ill that will destroy one’s wealth$and consign him to a fiery inferno.
169 The wealth in the hands of a person with envy at heart, and the destitution of a person,$devoid of it, are aberrations that need to be analysed.
170 An envious person doesn’t ever attain glory; of those who have no envy,$there is none who has fallen from glory.
171 If, without fairness, you desire to usurp the well-earned wealth of others,$it will destroy your family, trigger more crimes and result in guilt.
172 Those, who desist being unfair, will not sin, coveting$the material benefits of other’s possessions.
173 Craving for the cheap thrills that other’s money can give, one,$who seeks TRUE happiness, will not do an unrighteous act.
174 One who is flawless and wise and has mastered all senses, will never$feel ‘I’m poor’ and yearn for other’s wealth.
175 What is the use of deep wisdom and broad knowledge,$if one acts indiscreetly with anyone, coveting his wealth.
176 One who seeks to be compassionate and manifests it in virtuous ways, will succumb to$destructive thoughts and acts, if he falters and covets others’ possession.
177 Do not covet others’ wealth; on fruition,$the consequences are always contemptible.
178 How will one’s wealth never shrink? By, not desiring to$usurp the wealth of others.
179 Wealth will find means to bestow itself on those who,$knowing the virtue of not coveting others’ property, wisely desist from it.
180 Coveting others’ wealth injudiciously will result in dire consequences;$one who takes pride in not so desiring will meet success.
181 One, who does good deeds much beyond what books on virtue prescribe,$will benefit more from never backbiting anyone.
182 To wear a deceitful smile in one’s presence but to slander him in his absence slaughtering his reputation,$is more harmful than refuting all that is virtuous and doing unrighteous deeds.
183 It is better to die than to live by backbiting and then being hypocritical; so dying,$may yield the benefits spoken of by moral scriptures.
184 It is passable to speak impolitely to someone face to face,$but never utter an imprudent word behind the back.
185 One, who extols righteousness but is insincere at heart,$is exposed when he is devious enough to backbite.
186 One who smears another behind his back, opens himself up$to similar smear when he falters.
187 Through slander behind the back, one who gets estranged from friends,$is incapable of indulging in pleasant talk and gaining friends.
188 If one is known to habitually sully his friends for their faults,$what damage would he do unto others?
189 Out of its commitment to its virtue of patience, the earth tolerates$the presence of a slanderer on it.
190 If one looks at his faults in the same light as others’ faults,$will any harm befell the lingering human lives?
191 Those who make vain discourses, detested by many wise,$will be disparaged by all.
192 It is more harmful to speak vain words in front of many,$than to do contemptible deeds to your friends.
193 One’s gracelessness is exposed by$his elaborate hollow speeches.
194 Vain words spoken without dignity to a group, are$ungainly, unrighteous and yield no gains.
195 Reputation and respect will be lost,$when an affable person speaks worthless words.
196 Call him not a man, one who speaks$vain words; he is a scum.
197 A noble scholar may speak ungraciously, if he has to;$but he must refrain from speaking vain words.
198 The wise, who seek to understand deeper significance of things,$will not utter words with no substantial worth.
199 Those who are flawlessly wise, and have overcome all delusion,$will desist from speaking worthless words, even unconsciously.
200 Speak, such that what you speak is worthy; speak not$if what you speak is not worthy.
201 Sinners do not dread, while great men dread$the delusion of evil deeds.
202 Vile deeds yield vile results; and hence, vile deeds$are more fearsome than fire.
203 The foremost among all wise deeds, is to refrain from doing$harmful deeds even to those who detest you.
204 Desire not the destruction of another, even sub-consciously; else, virtue will determine$the destruction of the one who desires so.
205 Don’t commit anything evil in the name of poverty;$the poorer, it will render you.
206 If one wishes not to be tormented by painful reactions,$do not harm others.
207 There is scope for surviving any sort of enmity; but there can be no respite$from the repercussions of an evil deed.
208 The shadow stays rooted to the foot; the evil that men do$will remain to torment them.
209 If one loves himself, he shouldn’t do$an evil act, howsoever small it is.
210 Know a man to be free of torment, if he doesn’t take$a shortcut to do an evil deed.
211 Doing one’s duty without desiring any favours, is like rain;$what can the world do in return for the rains.
212 The purpose of one’s hard-earned money is$to be deployed to help the deserving.
213 In this world and the other, it is tough to attain$anything better than beneficence.
214 One who is aligned to the right ways of the world, lives amongst the alive;$the others are placed amongst the dead.
215 The wealth of the wise one who loves, and is loved by, the world,$is like a public pond brimming with water.
216 Riches falling upon the benevolent, resemble$a ripe tree laden with fruits, in the middle of a village.
217 Riches falling upon a person of great qualities, resemble$an unfailing herbal tree that is a source of medicines.
218 Even in times of distress, those who dont shy away from beneficence,$have clear vision of their moral responsibilities.
219 A benevolent person turns poor when he laments his inability$to do the good deeds he is used to doing.
220 What harm can come out of beneficence? Such harm$deserves to be bought even by selling oneself.
221 Giving to the poor is charity; all else$have the quality of anticipating a return.
222 To receive is a vice, even if it is accepted as a good virtue;$to give, is good, even if the heaven is denied.
223 Charity, without mention of the distress of poverty, is present$only in those from a good family.
224 To be asked to give is bitter too, until one sees$the smiling face of the recipient.
225 The strength of the strongest is to endure hunger;$it trails the ability to eradicate that hunger.
226 To douse the destructive hunger of the destitute, is$the safe to store the riches of the rich.
227 Hunger, the deadly disease, never touches one who is$accustomed to share his food with others.
228 Do they not know to enjoy the joy of giving, those loveless people,$who keep their wealth only to lose it.
229 Eating alone to increase one’s accumulated wealth,$is more distressing than begging.
230 There is nothing more harrowing than death; that too seems sweet,$if one is unable to give a thing to the needy.
231 Give, and live with fame; there is$no other gain for lives.
232 All that chroniclers chronicle, is the renown that rests$on those who give to the needy.
233 Nothing other than incomparable fame,$lasts forever in this world.
234 The world of devas, will cease to praise pure scholars, if one,$through his deeds across this world, earns everlasting fame.
235 Growth (of fame) amidst adverstiy and survival (of name) after death,$are possible only for the smartest.
236 Appear with fame, if you must appear; if not,$it is better not to appear than appear.
237 Why do those, who live with no fame, instead of blaming themselves,$blame those who revile them.
238 Reproach will remain for those who, with no fame,$have no legacy to leave behind.
239 The unblemished, fertile yield will diminish for the land$that bears a body with no repute.
240 Those who lead a life free of blame, are alive;$those who live devoid of fame, are not alive.
241 The gains of compassion are most precious;$material wealth is possessed even by the despicable.
242 Pursue the virtuous path and have compassion;$all spiritual quests lead to this companion.
243 Those with their hearts filled with compassion will never enter$a woeful world of darkness.
244 The compassionate, who care for all other lives,$do not fear for their own lives.
245 The fertile world which endows us with breathing air illustrates that$there is no sorrow for the compassionate.
246 Those who do evil, abandoning compassion, must have forsaken$and forgotten the meaning of life.
247 The poor do not possess this world;$likewise, the uncompassionate do not inhabit the other world.
248 Those who lack wealth may, one day, bloom; those who lack compassion$are incorrigible, and are forever, doomed.
249 The uncompassionate doing a righteous deed is like$the unwise finding true enlightenment.
250 When you confront those meeker than you, think of$yourself in front of a stronger person.
251 How can someone possess kindness, if one eats meat$from another body to grow one’s own body?
252 One, who doesn’t value money can’t be wealthy;$one, who eats meat, can’t be compassionate.
253 The heart of one who has eaten and relished flesh, is like$the heart of one leading an army: it cannot be compassionate.
254 What is compassion, and the lack of it : not killing and killing;$it is not virtuous to eat meat obtained by killing.
255 Survival of species, depends on not being eaten;$those who eat them, hell will not split its mouth to spit them out.
256 There wont be anyone selling meat for the sake of earning,$if the world stops killing for the sake of eating.
257 Meat is the wound of some body;$if one gets this realization, stop eating it.
258 Those who have wisdom, free of flaws, would not$eat a body, freed of its life.
259 To desist from killing a life and eating it, is better than$doing a thousand rituals, offering oblation.
260 To one who doesnt kill and refuses meat, all lives will$fold their arms and pay obeisance.
261 To endure any ordeal and to cause none$to other lives, embodies penance.
262 Penance makes sense only for those$who have been virtuous; for others, it is useless.
263 Is it to assist the ascetics$that the others have forgotten penance?
264 Those who do penance, if they so choose, can crush those$who harm them and elevate those who delight them.
265 Since it gives the power to attain whatever one wishes to,$penance needs to be attempted at the earliest.
266 Those who do penance do their duty; others,$engage in futile tasks, ensnared in desire.
267 Like flame that makes gold glitter more, pangs of pain$can only enlighten those who do penance.
268 One who has taken control of his life,$will be hailed by all.
269 Those, who have mastered penance, will find it possible$to even defer death.
270 The poor are abundant, since those who observe abstinence are few,$and those who dont are more.
271 The deceitful conduct of a treacherous mind,$will be sneered at by the five elements within.
272 Is a sky-high prominence of any use,$when one’s heart knowingly harbors a vice.
273 A person with a frail heart assuming an imposing appearance is like$a cow grazing wearing a tiger’s skin.
274 Doing misdeeds in the guise of an ascetic is like$a hunter capturing birds from behind the bushes.
275 If those who claim to have given up material desires, indulge in deceitful conduct,$it will cause suffering aplenty leading to self-pity.
276 There is nobody more evil than those who pretend to be$ascetics when their hearts haven’t renounced desire.
277 There are people, even if they, externally, resemble the lustrous exterior of a ‘kunri’ pea,$have hearts like the dark nose of the pea.
278 There are many, who, like holy men, take a dip in the river, but$hide the impurities of their heart.
279 Judge a person by his deeds: the straight arrow is destructive$and yazh, the bent musical bow, is sweet.
280 Tonsuring or growing long tresses is unnecessary, if one refrains from$doing what the world disdains.
281 If one wishes not to be ridiculed, let him protect$his heart from thoughts of swindling.
282 Even to think such thoughts is evil :$thoughts of swindling others’ property.
283 Swindled wealth, will seem to swell,$but will breach its limits and bust.
284 The love for swindling, when it yields,$yields indestructible distress.
285 Love, inspired by compassion, doesnt occur to those$who await others’ lapses to grab their wealth.
286 The excessive love for swindling renders$a person unable to abide by the limits of reason.
287 The clouded intelligence for defrauding is not for those$who understand the limits of reason and morality.
288 Guile lies in the heart of the fraudulent like righteousness$residing in the hearts of those who operate within boundaries.
289 Those, who have mastered nothing but swindling,$will exceed all limits and fall instantly.
290 The fraudulent will lose their living state; those who desist from defrauding$will not be denied the world of Devas.
291 Truth is defined as$speaking words that cause no harm.
292 Even a lie will be placed on par with the truth,$if it yields unblemished benefits.
293 Do not lie consciously; once you lie so,$your own conscience will sear you.
294 One who, guided by his heart, lives without lies,$will forever live in the hearts of all.
295 One who tells the truth, with all his heart, is ahead of those$who do  penance and charity.
296 No other fame equals not lying; without any physical strain$it yields all virtues.
297 Not lying, if practiced unfailingly, makes it worthwhile$to refrain from not doing the righteous deeds.
298 External cleanliness is brought about by water;$inner purity is evident in truthfulness.
299 All light is not light; for noble scholars,$truthfulness is the true light of enlightenment.
300 Of all the known truths, there is nothing$more significant than truthfulness.
301 Restrain anger where anger will be effective; where it won’t be,$does it matter whether one restrains it or not?
302 Where it can’t have an impact, anger is harmful;$where it can, there is still nothing more harmful.
303 Erase your anger against anyone;$only harm springs forth from it.
304 Is there a foe other than anger,$which anhilates smile and joy.
305 If you seek to protect yourself, curb your anger,$lest anger destroys you.
306 Anger, the fire known to destroy those who harbor it,$will also burn down the lifeboat, namely, one’s clan.
307 One, who possesses anger as a trait, will perish$with the unfailing precision of a hand that slams the ground.
308 Even if taunted with a harmful deed, tantamount to toasting in a multi-tongued fire,$better try not to be angered.
309 If the heart doesn’t harbour anger, one would$attain instantly all that it aspires to.
310 Those who yield to anger are as good as dead;$those who’ve shed anger are in effect saints.
311 Even if it yields glory and riches galore,$refraining from harming others is the principled path of the impeccable.
312 Not to hurt those who have caused harm before, out of wrath,$is the principled path of the impeccable.
313 To harm even those who antagonize us unprovoked, will bring boundless suffering.
314 The way to punish those who harmed us is to shame them by doing them good.
315 What use is it to be wise, if one cant treat others’ woes as one’s own.
316 Shy away from doing to others what you perceive would have harmed you.
317 Never do a harmful deed, however small, to anyone, in any circumstance, consciously or otherwise.
318 Why does one hurt other lives,$doing what he knows can hurt oneself?
319 If you harm others in the forenoon,$harm will visit you, by itself, in the afternoon.
320 Harm descends on those who harm others;$hence, those who wish not to be harmed, do no harm.
321 What is a righteous deed? Not killing.$Killing leads to all other evil deeds.
322 Sharing food and taking care of all lives, is the foremost$amongst all virtues compiled in all scriptures.
323 Not killing is the foremost virtue;$it is followed by not lying.
324 What is a perfect path? It is the pursuit of$the principle of not slaying any being.
325 Of all those who, despising material existence, have embraced renunciation,$the foremost are those who fear and shun killing.
326 Death dares not trample on the life of one who abides$by the principle of not killing any life.
327 Even if one were to sacrifice one’s own life, do not$commit the act of taking another life.
328 Even if great wealth leads to great benefits, great men loathe$wealth obtained by sacrifice of lives.
329 For those who can see the folly of it, the savage imbeciles$in any profession involving killing are doing a despicable job.
330 Those with a rotting sickly body and a rotten life mired in poverty,$must have killed other beings before.
331 To believe that transient things will last forever$is deplorable stupidity.
332 Great wealth accumulates  like a crowd assembled at a theatre;$when it goes, it vanishes like the crowd at the end of the play.
333 Wealth is transient; when it comes about,$use it to do a lasting righteous deed.
334 The wise get this : Time, that manifests itself as days,$is a sword that slices off life.
335 Before your tongue goes numb and you let out your last breath,$make haste to do a good deed.
336 Who was there yesterday, is gone today:$the world is thus.
337 Though they know not if they will live the next moment, they hold$over a billion thoughts in their minds.
338 A bird breaks away from the egg, leaving the shells alone;$so is life related to body.
339 Death is like going off to sleep;$birth is like waking up from it.
340 Doesn’t life have a permanent dwelling?$Nay, it has merely taken shelter in this body.
341 Whatever one renounces,$cannot cause pain.
342 The pleasures of this world after renouncing are immense;$if you wish those, renounce when you can.
343 To renounce all that one desires,$the five senses should be overcome.
344 Not to have a thing is the essense of penance;$any possession lures one away from it.
345 For those ascetics seeking relief from rebirth, their own flesh is an excess.$What purpose do other affinities serve?
346 If you can let go of the egoistic ‘I’ and the materialistic ‘Mine’,$you will reach someplace better than paradise.
347 Miseries will not  near$those who desist from desire.
348 Those who renounce completely, surge ahead;$others get enticed and end up entangled in a web.
349 Only when all attachments are severed, the cycle of life and death is broken;$anything short of it is transient.
350 Be attached to the One, who is attached to none.$Be so attached to be free of any attachments.
351 To be deluded into accepting anything untrue as gospel truth$leads to a wasted life.
352 Darkness will give way to joy,$when delusion is replaced with a flawless vision.
353 For those with conviction, who have dispelled all doubts,$the skies are nearer than the earth.
354 Whatever known through the five senses make no sense,$when there is no comprehension of truth.
355 It doesn’t matter what anything seems to be,$wisdom lies in seeking to grasp its true nature.
356 Those who have learnt and grasped the true essence here,$will find a path that will not bring them back here.
357 The mind that, after careful consideration, ascertains the truth$conclusively, would not contemplate rebirth.
358 For the vanity of birth to vanish,$fathom those ultimate truths of true significance.
359 To understand what to desire, and to give up other desires,$decimates the distress caused by those desires.
360 When even words cease to exist for desire, anger and ignorance;$resultant maladies will be vanquished.
361 Desire is the seed which, for all lives,$unfailingly, leads to an endless cycle of birth.
362 If you desire, desire for freedom from birth;$desiring not to desire, too, leads to that freedom.
363 There is no wealth here better than lack of desire;$nowhere else is there anything that equals it.
364 Purity is absence of desire;$which, is obtained through the quest for truth.
365 Only those who’ve renounced desire have renounced;$the rest, who’ve renounced all else, have not truly renounced.
366 Desire is a deceptive trap;$fearing it, is a virtue.
367 One can do flawless deeds the way one wants to do,$when desire is destroyed completely.
368 Those who are devoid of desire are free from misery;$for others, it keeps piling up.
369 When desire, the misery of miseries, is decimated,$unending joy abounds.
370 Eternal bliss ensues,$when insatiable desire ends.
371 Constructive fate causes tireless endeavor leading to prosperity;$destructive fate causes indolence.
372 Malign fate blunts one’s intelligence;$in its turn, benign fate sharpens it.
373 Even if knowledge comes through profound books,$one’s innate wisdom remains dominant.
374 The world is stratified based on two factors:$wealth and wisdom; and, they are not correlated.
375 While seeking wealth, positive aspects can turn harmful;$and negative aspects beneficial.
376 Strive hard, we may; but what we don’t deserve doesn’t stay,$and what we deserve, we can’t dispose.
377 One may amass wealth worth millions, but can consume only as ordained by the Ordainer.
378 Even those who possess nothing to enjoy will ‘renounce’,$if only one can escape the misery that is to be suffered.
379 Why bemoan the misery caused by fate, when one enjoys the good without complaint.
380 Is there anything mightier than fate?$It remains dominant despite all plans devised to counter it.
381 The military, citizenry, resources, advisers, friends and fortresses :$who owns these six is a lion amongst kings.
382 Fearlessness, generosity, wisdom and vitality:$these four are persistent characteristics expected of a king.
383 Vigilance, erudition and boldness:$these three never abandon a competent ruler.
384 Not swerving from righteousness and justice; and deterring any violations;$assuming greatness and pride through benevolent courage : a ruler should do.
385 Strategizing, earning revenues, preserving  and allocating resources :$a government should be capable of.
386 The world will eulogize a ruler , who is$easily accessible and refrains from rude rebukes.
387 For those who, with sweet words, are capable of giving generously$and protecting their people, the world is how they wish it to be.
388 A righteous king who renders justice, and nurtures his people,$will be hailed as an almighty leader.
389 The leader who heeds to counsel that stings the ear,$will have the world rest under his sceptre.
390 Charity, love, justice and safeguarding the people:$who has these four is the guiding light for all leaders.
391 Learn, what is to be learnt, with no flaws;$once learnt, stand by what you learned.
392 Numbers and letters;$they are known as eyes to humans, they are.
393 The learned have eyes;$the ignorant have on their faces, two gashes.
394 Delight when they are met, and nostalgia when they have left,$are the effects of the learned’s deeds.
395 The learned learn by lovingly humbling themselves before others, like the poor before rich;$those who thus don’t learn are lowly.
396 The deeper a well is dug, the more the water that springs;$the more one learns, the more the wisdom it brings.
397 For the learned, every nation is their nation; and every place their place;$why then, does one shun learning till death.
398 Learning acquired once will$stand in good stead for seven generations.
399 Seeing that the world gets excited by what excites them,$the learned fall more in love with learning.
400 Learning is the indestructubile, and significant, wealth;$other riches are not true wealth.
401 Speaking before an audience, without reading relevant books,$is like rolling the dice without drawing the squares.
402 An illiterate wishing to make a speech is like$a breastless androgyne wishing to become a woman.
403 Even the ignorant will be considered good$if they shut themselves up before the learned.
404 Though the illiterate may display streaks of intelligence,$they would still not be acknowledged by the learned.
405 The vanity of the ignorant vanishes,$when they start speaking in a gathering.
406 The illiterate are seen as existing to fill space;$they are like barren waste lands.
407 A person who has no in-depth learning and intellectual acumen,$is as impressive as a doll made of mud.
408 Not even the penury of the good is as pernicious as$the wealth that has fallen on the ignorant.
409 The uneducated maybe of higher birth; but they are not respected as much as$the learned men born in low classes.
410 Animal amongst men are those uneducated$amongst the educated.
411 The wealth of listening is the wealth amongst all wealth,$the foremost wealth.
412 When food there is none for the ear,$spare a little for the belly.
413 Those who can feed aurally through listening,$are equal, in this world, to the noble beings devouring divine food.
414 Even if you can’t learn by reading, listen;$it is the crutch in times of crisis.
415 A steadying staff on a skiddy surface, are the words$of those who possess utmost propriety.
416 Listen to the good; doesn’t matter, how much;$whatever be the quantum, immense greatness, it will bring.
417 Misconstrue they may, but, ludicrous words, they will not utter:$those who’ve always listened, analysed, and learnt.
418 Hear, they can; but deaf they are:$the ears that are not pierced by aural learning.
419 Unless one is an intense, attentive aural learner, it is unlikely$that one will be have a humble tongue.
420 Those beings who know the taste, only of the tongue,and not of the ear :$does it matter whether die or live?
421 Wisdom is the shield against suffering; and the fortress,$impregnable and indestructible for the foes.
422 Without letting the mind to wander on its own will,$wisdom steers it away from harm, and towards good.
423 Whatever whoever may say, listen to it,$and wisdom is to comprehend the true meaning of it.
424 Wisdom lies in keeping it simple for your audience,$and grasping all intricacies when others speak.
425 Wisdom, it is to embrace the world, and not to be$overtly delighted or dismayed.
426 What the world conforms to, wisdom lies in$conforming to those.
427 The wise anticipate the outcomes;$unwise are those who can’t.
428 It is foolish, not to fear, what ought to be feared;$the wise fear those that must be feared.
429 The wise, who are perceptive, and are prepared,$will not be staggered by any harm.
430 The wise have everything; the unwise have nothing,$irrespective of whatever they may possess.
431 Those who lack arrogance, wrath and pettiness:$wealth, in their hands, assumes dignity.
432 Avarice, ignominious pride, and repulsive$gloating, are fatal flaws in a leader.
433 For those who fear disgrace,  their faults,$though grain-sized, woud seem gigantic.
434 Fend off your own flaws;$those flaws are your fatal foes.
435 Having no safeguards before the onset of trouble,$will make our lives, dry straws before a raging fire.
436 What flaw could fall upon a leader who rectifies his faults$before observing and assailing others’ faults.
437 The wealth of one who, out of pettiness, doesn’t do what ought to done,$will vanish without growth.
438 Clinging to wealth, out of avarice,$is worse than the any other flaw.
439 Never give in to egotism; never indulge in vain$acts that benefit none.
440 Those who enjoys what they enjoy, unknown to foes,$are difficult to defeat.
441 Assess, know the potential, and secure the company of$virtuous, veteran, wise men.
442 Nurture the relationship of those who relieve,$and ward off your miseries.
443 It is most precious to nurture,$and possess the company of great men.
444 The mightiest of all strengths is to patronize,$and pay heed to those who are better than us.
445 A ruler rules best with wise counsellors as eyes;$select them after watchful scrutiny.
446 When a capable leader feels at ease with capable associates,$there is nothing his foes can do to harm him.
447 One who leads companions who can admonish him :$who is capable of harming him?
448 A ruler unprotected by companions who can admonish him,$will face ruin without any foes ruining him.
449 There is no return without investment;$for leaders, there is no stability without the prop of their supporters.
450 Tenfold worse it is, to lose the company of the good,$than to earn the hostility of many foes.
451 The great, fear petty company;$the petty, perceive, and accept, them as their own.
452 Water assumes the quality of the land;$wisdom depends on the company one keeps.
453 Senses are governed by the brain;$reputation is determined by one’s company.
454 Wisdom seems to stem from the mind but$is shaped by people around us.
455 Purity of mind, and deeds, depends on$the quality of one’s associations.
456 Those who are pure at heart, will leave behind good children and legacy;$those who have clean company will find no good task impossible.
457 The goodness of heart is a treasure for humans;$goodness of company leads to glory.
458 Even for noble scholars, who are good at heart,$good company offers strong protection.
459 Goodness of heart leads to joy even after death;$good company protects it from straying.
460 There is no better ally than good company;$no woe can be worse than bad company.
461 What gets consumed, what gets created, and the returns the creation yields :$consider all before starting a task.
462 Nothing is impossible$for those who start a task with aptly chosen associates, and after thorough assessment.
463 Losing the capital in pursuit of profit$is not a task the wise will undertake.
464 Without assessing and getting clarity, will they not start,$they who fear for their reputation.
465 Leaping before you look is like$planting foes, and nurturing them.
466 To do what ought not to be done is disastrous;$not to do what ought to be done is equally so.
467 Think before you start;$to think that you can think after starting spells doom.
468 Hard work, the wrong way, will be futile$even if the world applauds.
469 Well-intended actions could go awry, if they are not customized$to suit the nature of all those involved.
470 The world doesn’t accept what it can’t approve;$assess and act such that you are not ridiculed.
471 Assess before an action, the strengths of$the task, self, opponents and companions.
472 Know what is achievable, gain requisite knowledge,$and stay focused : nothing is impossible.
473 Many have boken down midway, having started with fervour$without assessing their capabilities.
474 He is uncollaborative; he knows not his capabilities;$he is narcissistic to boot; he is set for a swift fall.
475 A cart, though laden with only peacock feathers,$may yet have its axle broken, when overloaded.
476 Having climbed to the tip of a branch,$striving to go further, will be fatal.
477 Do charity, but within your means;$that is the way to utilize, and protect, wealth.
478 Though revenues are limited, no harm –$if you don’t let expenses exceed them.
479 A life lived beyond one’s means, will look glitzy$but will lose its sheen and give way to gloom.
480 Generosity beyond the limits of one’s resources,$is bound to cease soon, after exhausting the resources.
481 A crow will defeat an owl during the day;$a king needs to pick the right time to defeat his foes.
482 Doing the right things at the right time, is the rope$which binds the wealth, making it boundless.
483 Does an impossible task exist,$when the right resources and strategy are deployed at the right time?
484 Desire the world, you may, and it will be yours,$if, for your actions, you choose the right time and place.
485 They will await the opportune moment –$they, who determinedly desire the world.
486 The ardent and the mighty too can stay subdued$like a rampant ram that withdraws before it pounces.
487 The wise will not break into an external rage instantly;$they will keep their anger suppressed, biding their time.
488 Bear with your foes; when the time is ripe,$turn things around.
489 When the rarest of moments comes about, grab it$to accomplish the toughest of tasks.
490 Like a heron, be still when the time is not ripe,$and spear the prey when it is near.
491 Start not a task, thinking it is easy,$until you choose the right place to accomplish it.
492 Even for the mighty, seeking to conquer,$a fortress offers benefits galore.
493 Even the meek will battle and win,$when they tenaciously take on their foes at the right place.
494 Their dismissive opponents will lose the plot, when those$who undertake a task, do it right at the right place.
495 In deep waters, the crocodile wins;$When it gets out, it is vanquished.
496 Neither will the strongest chariots sail the seas,$nor will the seafaring ships ride the land.
497 If, after considering all angles, one chooses to do a task$at an apt place, he needs no company other than fearlessness.
498 If a king with a measly army battles from a strategic location,$the confidence of the mighty foe gets shattered.
499 Even if the foes are devoid of fortresses and exceptional valour,$it is tough to beat them on their turf.
500 An uncontrollable tusker that has gored many a spearman,$when stuck in a deep quagmire, is easy prey for a fox.
501 Assess the attitude of a person on these four aspects before choosing him:$righteousness, money, lust and fear for life.
502 Accept only a person who is of good birth, is clear of flaws,$has fear for infamy and shame.
503 Even a person who is known to be learned and faultless,$if assessed well, will rarely be free of flaws and ignorance.
504 Weigh the virtues and vices, discern which is more,$and thus decide.
505 The touchstone for greatness or unworthiness$is one’s own deeds.
506 Choose not those who are unrighteous :$with nothing to bind them, they won’t dread disgrace.
507 Out of affection, choosing without properly assessing,$will result in folly.
508 One who accepts without assessing,$will invite harm that will last for generations.
509 Choose not anyone without assessment;$once chosen, trust the person to deliver on the assigned tasks.
510 Selecting without assessing, and doubting after selecting,$will ensure enduring distress.
511 A person, who assesses pros and cons, and has done well,$will be entrusted with key responsibilities.
512 Let him do that task – he, who has multiplied the sources of income,$generated revenues, and analysed and overcome hurdles.
513 Love, wisdom, fearless analytical mind and lack of misdirected desire:$go for a person who scores high on these.
514 In whatever way we may have assessed and chosen people,$they stand out based on quality of execution.
515 Assign the task to those who know it, can plan, execute and get it done;$and not to the most prominent, or likeable, person.	
516 Assign a task after assessing the person,$the task and the most suited time.
517 This task – he can do, using these resources : once you reason it out thus,$leave the task to him.
518 Assess and determine that he can do this task, using these resources,$and empower him to do the task.
519 Wealth will desert the leader who doubts the intimacy of$the expert doing  a task on account of the task.
520 The ruler should review progress regularly –$as long as his officials don’t falter, his state won’t falter.
521 Even when all wealth is lost, it is the kin$who will maintain their ties.
522 If one gets kin who never lose their love,$wealth never ceases sprouting in different ways.
523 The life of one with no intimate relationship,$is like water flowing into a pond with no bounds.
524 To live surrounded by the kin, is the$benefit gained by gaining wealth.
525 One who practices generosity and kind words,$will be encircled by an extended family.	
526 He gives generously and is free of anger –$none on this earth can have better kin than him.
527 The crow never conceals food but cries out for company;$wealth and progress too stays only with those of such quality.
528 A king who avoids an undifferentiated approach but tailors it to suit differing capabilities,$will retain many who will appreciate it.	
529 Well-wishers who had broken with you before,$will return if the cause for resentment is rectified.	
530 When defectors return for any reason, the ruler should be$open to accept them, after due assessment.
531 Getting slack and smug when relishing a joyous moment$is more harmful than excessive anger.
532 Complacence, sloth and contempt slaughter one’s reputation$just as begging and gorging will kill one’s wisdom.
533 There is no fame for those who are smug, lax or derisive :$scholars of all walks and beliefs concur on this.
534 No fortress is good enough for those who’ve fear;$no good can occur to those who are smug, slack or derisive.
535 One who is complacent and derisive, and doesn’t anticipate the repercussions,$will resent his lapses later.
536 Never be complacent about any task or deride anyone : nothing is better than$following this unswervingly.
537 The impossible doesn’t exist when you do the task$diligently, with an alert, incomplacent mind.
538 Do, diligently, deeds that have been extolled; not in seven births$will they benefit – those who derisively avoid those deeds.
539 Think of those who were doomed due to derision and negligence,$when you bask smugly in the glory of your might.
540 Easy it is, to get what you seek,$if you’re focused on that you seek.
541 Investigating intensely, leading fairly without unduly favoring anyone,$analysing and acting, constitute justice.
542 The world survives, looking up to the skies for rain;$the people live, looking up to their ruler’s sceptre for justice.
543 The scriptures that scholars write and the virtues they extol,$have their roots in the sceptre of the ruler.
544 The world will embrace the feet of the ruler,$who embraces his people and renders justice.
545 In the state of the king who rules justly, as befits a king,$even monsoons and harvests will happen unfailingly.
546 It is not the spear that gives victory; it is the king’s sceptre,$the one that never tilts unjustly.
547 A king protects all the world; he is protected$by the justice that he dispenses resolutely.
548 A king who isn’t readily accessible and doesn’t rule justly,$will be ruined by his own lowly deeds.
549 To punish a crime, in order to protect and nurture one’s subjects,$is not a blot on the king but his duty.
550 The king punishing, severely, those brutal murderers,$is akin to clearing weeds from the crop.
551 He is worse than assassins, the ruler who harries his citizens,$and indulges in unjust acts.
552 The extortion and graft done wielding the sceptre$is no different from robbery done pointing a spear.
553 The ruler who doesn’t assess and administer justly, day after day,$will let his state rot day by day.
554 The king who lets his sceptre tilt towards tyranny$will lose all his wealth, people and state.
555 The tears shed by citizens subjected to intolerable grief$are the weapons that erode the rulers’ wealth.
556 Just rule yields lasting fame to a ruler;$no justice, no fame.
557 Just as lack of rain is to the world, so is$to mankind – rulers’ lack of benevolence.
558 Being wealthy is worse than being poor,$under an unjust ruler.
559 If the king lets his sceptre of justice waver,$the skies won’t yield and monsoons will fail.
560 The cows’ milk will dry up; the brahmans will forget the scriptures;$when the king stops being their saviour.
561 Investigating neutrally, and punishing appropriately,$so as to deter the repeat of a crime, is the duty of the king.
562 Raise the sceptre swift and stern, but land it softly,$those who wish never to lose what they possess.
563 A king will be isolated and will face rapid ruin,$if he becomes a tyrant indulging in terrifying deeds.
564 “My king – he is a tyrant” : such a denouncement$is certain to hasten a king’s downfall.
565 Inaccessible and has a harsh countenance – his huge wealth$resembles a treasure protected by demons.
566 If he is of harsh words, and has no compassion,$his extensive wealth will become extinct soon.
567 Harsh words and excessive punishments form the saw$that files away the king’s military might.
568 When the king doesn’t take counsel of his advisers,$and tends to explode with rage, his wealth starts imploding.
569 When the foes strike, a king who has not built his defences,$will fall swiftly, trembling with fear.
570 A tyrant will assemble an ensemble of the unlearned;$but for them, there is no burden for the earth.
571 There exists this stupendous beauty called compassion;$and therefore, the world exists.
572 It is compassion that keeps the world functioning as it should;$there are those who lack it, and they burden the earth.
573 Of what use is a tune that can’t suit any song?$Of what use are eyes, which have no compassion?
574 An eye that is not abound with compassion,$what purpose is it serving on the face, feigning existence?
575 Eyes are adorned by compassion; but for it,$they would be considered wounds.
576 Trees rooted to the land they resemble, those though$born with eyes, don’t use them to be compassionate.
577 Those who lack compassion have no eyes;$who truly have eyes can’t lack compassion.
578 The world belongs to those who do their duty unfalteringly,$while being compassionate.
579 Being compassionate and patient, even with those$who hurt us, is a quality, most admirable.
580 Even after seeing poison being poured, they will consume it$and converse cordially,$they who seek to be captivatingly civilized and compassionate.
581 Intelligence operations and highly regarded books –$a king should consider them his eyes.
582 Knowing everything that happens to everyone – to always gain such intelligence$at great speed is the duty of a king.
583 There is no better way to victory for a king than$deploying spies on surveillance and gathering credible intelligence.
584 Having everyone – officials, kin and foes,$under surveillance is the job of a spy.
585 A spy should be capable of inconspicuous appearance,$fearlessly looking into others’ eyes and never disclosing critical facts.
586 A spy should be able to go incognito, as an ascetic and others,$infiltrate all places, and tirelessly gather intelligence by any means.
587 A spy should be capable of extracting top secrets nonchalantly,$and verifying their veracity beyond doubt.
588 Ascertain even the intelligence gathered by a spy$by deploying another spy.
589 Lead the sleuths such that they don’t know each other;$when three of them concur on an input, you know it is reliable.
590 When you honour a spy, do it not in public;$else, you would broadcast your own secret.
591 The haves are haves if they have zeal; if they have it not,$they are have-nots, whatever else they may have.
592 Possessing passion is the true possession; all other wealth$is transient and will vanish.
593 They will not bemoan the loss of wealth,$they who have enduring zeal.
594 Wealth, on its own, will find the way to reach$those with unflagging fervor.
595 The depth of water determines how tall an aquatic plant grows;$zeal in the heart dictates how far man goes.
596 Fervently aspire for the best; even if you fail,$it is still as good as succeeding.
597 The zealous won’t flinch in the face of trouble;$the elephant, even if buried under a barrage of arrows, never relents.
598 Those without zeal, will never attain$the pride of being hailed as generous.
599 It is huge; it has sharp tusks; yet, the tusker$is frightened when the tiger attacks.
600 Abundant zeal is one’s strength and wisdom; those without it$are trees, their human form being the only difference.
601 The inextinguishable flame of distinguished ancestry will be put out,$if the filth of sloth starts blocking it.
602 Kill laziness, if you wish$your clan to become a reputed clan.
603 The imbecile who lives clutching the fatal indolence,$will see his family’s demise before his own.
604 A ruler who falls into the lap of laziness and doesn’t strive hard,$will witness the destruction of his subjects and an upsurge in crime.
605 Procrastination, neglect, sloth and slumber :$these four are the ship that is boarded lovingly by habitual losers.
606 It is unlikely that the lazy will prosper,$even if they inherit the riches of an emperor.
607 Well-meaning rebukes will be followed by ridicule,$if one is indolent and refrains from striving hard.
608 If laziness rests on a state and its rulers, it will be$enslaved by its foes.
609 The ills that befell his state and leadership,$will vanish if one gives up his indolence.
610 The ruler who has no sloth will attain all that was attained by$the one who measured the world with his feet.
611 Shun not a task because it is tough;$perseverance brings respect.
612 The world deserts those who desert an essential task;$while executing, don’t wilt and let the task fail.	 
613 The greatness of benevolence rests on those$who have the quality of perseverance. 
614 Benevolence of the person without persistence,$will turn futile like a sword in the hands of a coward. 
615 Forsaking gratification, he who perseveres,$is a pillar for one’s kin – wiping and bearing their woes.
616 Effort creates wealth;$lack of it induces poverty.
617 Thus they speak : the angel of poverty resides with the sluggard;$the lotus-residing angel of wealth rests on the efforts of the unsluggish.
618 Lack of good fortune brings not disgrace; not gaining requisite knowledge,$and not persisting, is disgraceful.
619 Even if God has given up, perseverance will pay$the wages for one’s efforts.
620 They will triumph over fate –$they who persevere resolutely without respite.
621 Smile in times of trouble; it is without equal,$in repeatedly trouncing trouble.
622 Floods of tribulation will be wiped away,$when the wise set their minds on overcoming it.
623 They will torment the torment,$those who don’t get tormented by torment.
624 Whenever stuck in a mire, if one chugs along like a bull,$trouble will be distressed.
625 Even under an onslaught of adversities, if one is unfazed,$his torments will be tormented.
626 Will they be distressed by poverty – those who, in times of wealth,$don’t stingily cling to their wealth?
627 Knowing that the human body is ever a target for afflictions,$the wise will not be distressed by distress.
628 He who yearns not for pleasures, dismisses adversities as inevitable,$will never be distressed.
629 He who yearns not for pleasure in joyous times, will not$be distressed in times of sorrow.
630 If one accepts adversities as pleasures,$his adversaries too will acclaim him.
631 A minister is one who can envisage rare deeds,$the resources and time entailed, and the means to execute.
632 Resolve, protecting the citizens, learning and perseverance –$a minister is one who is capable in these too.
633 A minister is adept at these :$splitting the foes, binding the allies, and uniting the estranged.
634 A minister should be proficient in assessing,$executing and articulating unequivocally. 
635 A minister knows righteousness; he can enunciate knowledgablely;$he is always skillful at execution : he is an apt counsellor.
636 For one who has an impressive intellect, and is well-read,$is there any task that can be extremely challenging?
637 Even if you know well how to do a task,$do it knowing the nature of your world. 
638 Even when the king stubs out the wise counsel,$and knows not by himself, it is the duty of the minister to advise firmly.
639 It is better to face 700 million foes$than have a scheming minister.
640 They plan meticulously but yet can’t take it to completion,$those who are poor at execution.
641 The benefits of a gifted tongue, outclass$the benefits of anything else.	 
642 It creates and destructs;$hence ensure there is never a blemish in your speech.
643 Speak with such quality that it binds those who queried,$and casts a spell on even those who didn’t.
644 Speak words that befit your capabilities and those of the listener;$there is no greater virtue and wealth than that.
645 Say a word such that no other word$can surpass that word.
646 Speaking alluring words, and seeking to learn when others speak,$is the way of those with impeccable qualities.
647 If he speaks capably, flawlessly, and fearlessly,$it is impossible to confront and defeat him.
648 The world will instantly pay heed to those$who can speak coherently and pleasingly.
649 Those who know not how to converse clearly and flawlessly in a few words,$love to speak profusely.
650 Those who cannot convey, and make others comprehend, what they have learnt,$are like a bunch of bloomed flowers that have no fragrance.
651 Good companions lead to valuable gains,$and good deeds lead to everything needed.
652 They should be desisted from forever:$deeds not leading to the good and yielding fame.	 
653 They who seek greater heights$should shun deeds that dent their reputation.	 
654 Even in distress, they won’t do deplorable deeds,$those with unfaltering clarity and vision.
655 ‘What have I done?’ – do not do deeds leading to such regret;$even if you do, do not ever repeat them.
656 Even when you see your mother starving,$don’t do deeds deplored by those, noble and respected.
657 Far better than ill-gotten wealth is$the extreme poverty fallen on the noble and exemplary.
658 Though successful, they yield nothing but pain,$when deplorable deeds are done rather than being shunned.
659 What is acquired with others’ tears, goes away with your tears;$good deeds, even if begun with losses, will yield fruits later on.
660 Being content with ill-gotten wealth,$is like storing water in a fresh unbaked mud pot.
661 Execution focus lies in the resolve of the mind;$all else is secondary.
662 Doing flawlessly, and resolute in the event of a flaw,$are the paths shown by the learned.
663 Virility lies in taking a task to completion;$giving up midway causes endless misery.
664 Easy it is, to say; rare it is,$the ability to do what one says.
665 Those who have gained great acclaim for their execution resolve,$bring good to their rulers, and are hence thought of highly.
666 What they seek, they will achieve as they seek,$if those who seek are made of firm resolve.
667 Deride not a person seeing their appearance;$there are those who are like a small lynchpin that make a large chariot roll.	667
668 Do the task that you conceived with clarity of thought,$unwaveringly and without procrastination.
669 Even if it causes distress while doing,$daringly do the task that brings joy.
670 Whatever ability they may have acquired, the world desires them not,$when they desire not the resoluteness to execute.
671 The end of strategizing is gaining the confidence to execute;$it is wasteful to cede that confidence in delays.	 
672 Delay those tasks that better be delayed; delay not,$those tasks that cannot be delayed.
673 Execute as planned whenever possible; when not possible,$do whatever is needed to resume action.
674 The remnants of a task and an enmity, (left unfinished,)$when we think of it, can harm as much as the remains of a fire. 
675 Resources, tools, time, place and the task –$analyze these beyond doubt, and then act.
676 The means to the end, the obstacles and the fruits of the deed –$anticipate all these, and then act.
677 One who is excellent at execution, executes after$grasping the subtleties of all tasks from the experts.
678 Using one task to accomplish another task,$is like tethering a musth elephant using another.
679 More pressing than doing favors to friends,$is befriending foes.
680 The smaller state, fearing internal panic,$will submit to a superior power, if their concerns are addressed.
681 Love, birth in a suitable family, affable nature$attractive to any king are qualities of an emissary.
682 Love, wisdom and sagacious speech are$three qualities essential for an envoy.
683 An emissary on a mission, seeking a diplomatic win over other rulers,$should be learned enough to excel amongst the learned.
684 Wisdom, physical presence and thorough learning – he who has these three in abundance,$let him be the one to go on a diplomatic mission.
685 Being coherent, avoiding objectionable words, and evoking smiles$are the ways of an envoy to get desired results.
686 A good envoy is well learned, can look anyone in the eye,$has compelling speech and comes up with timely strategies.
687 Foremost among envoys is one who knows the task,$weighs the time and place, and speaks with sagacity.
688 Principled, endearing and courageous – these three$are qualities of an envoy conveying a message truthfully.
689 An emissary conveying his ruler’s message to another,$should be firm enough never to denigrate him even by slip of tongue.
690 Even if it means meeting his own end,$an emissary ought to further his leader’s ends.
691 Not too far, not too near – while being with an irritable ruler,$resemble those warming before a fire.
692 Desiring not the objects of desire for the king,$gives lasting riches through the king.
693 If you deem it imperative, maintain impeccable decorum;$it maybe tough to placate anyone, once they turn bitter.
694 Whisper not in others’ ears nor giggle with them$in the presence of dignified elders.
695 Don’t eavesdrop on or badger about any confidential matter;$hear it only when it is revealed.
696 Gauge the mood; await the ripe time; avoid what he abhors;$and speak what is essential, such that it charms him.
697 Tell him what will enthrall him; but indulge not$in useless small talk, even if he desires so.
698 Scorn him not because he is younger or is related;$respect him for his position and reputation.
699 Those with a clarity of purpose will refrain from$acting repulsively thinking they command respect.
700 Taking advantage of proximity to the top$and acting out of character brings ruin.
701 He who reads minds by observing, with no words spoken,$is ever an adornment for the world with unchanging oceans. 
702 Rate him amongst gods, he who can$read minds with indubitable certainty.
703 Those who can read minds based on gestures or expressions –$if need be, give any of your organs to have them with you.
704 Who can sense thoughts without being told,$they are distinct, resembling others only in their human forms.
705 If one can’t observe and interpret body language,$what purpose do eyes serve amongst the organs?
706 The face, like a crystal that shows the hues of objects around,$betrays the mood of the mind.	 
707 What can be smarter than the face?$It is quick to sense and show if the heart is pleased or peeved.
708 When those who can look into your heart and know your intentions,$be with you, tasks will be accomplished if you just face them.
709 The eyes will convey the animosity or affinity to those$who can decipher the subtleties of the eyes.	 
710 The scale used by the astute to gauge the emotions,$if you think of it, is nothing but the eyes.
711 Those who are well versed with the various ways of speech,$know and assess the audience before speaking.
712 Before speaking,anticipate the reaction of the audience and master the subject,$if you are conversant with the modes of expression.
713 Those who know not their audience and yet endeavor to speak,$know not the styles of speech and their reach, nor can they be competent.
714 Be brilliant before the bright, and amidst the ignorant$turn blank as a wall plastered white.
715 It is the best among all the good deeds to have the restraint$to not speak out of turn, in a forum of learned elders.
716 It will tantamount to swerving from the righteous path,$being disgraced before an audience, widely-read but highly-receptive.
717 The expertise of the erudite gets enhanced$by addressing an audience capable of flawlessly grasping those words.
718 To speak before an audience who possess clear understanding$is like watering a sapling, growing by itself in a nursery.
719 Those who can speak lucidly in a learned forum$should refrain from even forgetfully speaking the same in an unworthy forum.
720 Speaking before an audience who are no match for you, is$like throwing away the elixir of life into the drains.
721 Those who are well versed with the various ways of speech,$will choose the right style for a forum, and won’t blunder out of fear.
722 They are known the most learned amongst the learned,$those who can express their learnings persuasively before a learned audience.
723 Simple people, ready to die at the warfront, abound;$those who fearlessly address an audience are a rare breed.
724 Speak persuasively before the learned, what you have learnt,$and absorb more from those who are more learned than you.
725 Choose the right works and learn, knowing the limitations,$so that you can debate fearlessly with any audience.
726 What use is the sword to cowards?$Of what use are books to those who fear a learned audience?
727 A sharp sword in the hands of a coward before foes,$is the scholarship of him who fears a forum.
728 They may be of great learning but can serve no purpose$if they shy away from speaking compellingly to a good audience.
729 Though well learned, they’re considered worse than the ignorant,$those who fear an assembly of good people.
730 Out of stage-fright, those who can’t articulate$their learnings well, maybe alive but are as good as lifeless.
731 Unfailing crops, exemplary people, and the wealthy$with untarnished and undiminishing wealth, constitute a country.
732 Desirable due to its huge wealth; devoid of detriments$for high yields: such should a country be.
733 In an ideal country, its citizens bear any new burdens$which, all at once,afflict them, and continue to willingly pay taxes.
734 Acute hunger, debilitating diseases and warring foes$are absent in a good state.
735 Multiple factions, destructive dissent, and murderous$criminals who torment the rulers are not found in a good state.
736 It faces no calamities; even if it does, its resources are undiminished:$such a nation is the foremost amongst nations.
737 Lakes above and wells below, mountains well-located, rivers and streams flowing from them,$and strong fortresses constitute a country.
738 Health, wealth, high yields, happiness and strong defence –$these five adorn a state.
739 A good state is one which yields without toil;$it is not one, if one has to toil hard to produce yields.
740 A state might have everything; but they are of no use,$if it doesn’t have the right ruler.
741 A fortress is critical for those on the offensive;$so is it, for those on the defensive to protect themselves.
742 Pearl-like perennial water, sand, mountains and shaded woods –$a strong fortress contains all these.
743 Tall, vast, impregnable and unapproachable –$experts prescribe these four measures for forts.
744 Boundaries, vulnerable and needing protection, are minimal but area enclosed is vast –$such a fortress destroys the confidence of advancing foes.
745 A good fortress is unassailable, contains sufficient food$and makes life easy for the residents.
746 A strong fortress contains all required resources$and valiant warriors who will support during a siege.
747 Neither siege, nor an all-out attack, nor sowing dissent$will befell a strong fortress.
748 A strong fortress aids those devoted to stay and defend it,$to defeat the formidable foes who have besieged it.
749 A fortress attains glory through the glory attained by its residents,$who,through their daring deeds, swiftly subdue the foes on the warfront.
750 However formidable it maybe, a fortress is futile$for those not formidable in their deeds.
751 Wealth makes them, who were deemed worthless, worthy;$if not, it is not wealth.
752 The poor are ridiculed by all, and$the rich esteemed by all.
753 The unfailing lamp called wealth will dislodge darkness$by throwing light anywhere it wants to.
754 It yields righteousness and joy, the wealth$acquired capably without causing any harm.
755 Consider it unworthy of acquiring – wealth$that is not generated with compassion and love.
756 Funds generated in the normal course, internal taxes and$acquisitions from enemies are sources of wealth for the king.
757 The infant called compassion, birthed by love,$is nurtured by the rich custodian called wealth.
758 Doing a deed with some wealth on hand$is like climbing a hilltop and watching tuskers tussle.
759 Make money – there is no weapon sharper than it$to sever the pride of your foes.
760 For those who have made abundant wealth through fair means,$the remaining two (righteousness and love) are easy to achieve.
761 A well-structured, indomitable military, never daunted by dire prospects,$is primary amongst all possessions of the king.
762 The undaunted valour in dire situations, with no fear of consequences,$is rarely seen outside of a seasoned army.
763 What if a rival army of rats comes roaring like an ocean,$they will dissipate when the snake hisses.
764 A real army is one that displays the innate valour$of never getting vanquished by any disaster.
765 An army is one which has the courage to battle united,$even if the Lord of Death descends on them.
766 Courage, pride, striding the honorable course, clarity –$these four best fortify an army.
767 The army that can discern the tactics of its advancing foes,$will stride over the dust the foes bite.
768 An army though bereft of the skills and resources to wage a war,$will still gain renown for its discipline and preparation.
769 Pettiness, unabated fury and hatred, and poverty –$an army not having these will win.
770 An army may have brave warriors in abundance,$but will meet its end if there are no great leaders.
771 Oh foes, stand not facing my leader!$Many have done so, and now stand as (memorial) stones.
772 Better to bear the spear that missed the elephant$than the arrow that got the rabbit.
773 Great manliness lies in bellicose valor;$grace towards ailing foes, adds steel to it.
774 He spent his spear slaying an elephant,$but breaks into a smile, plucking out the spear that pierces him.
775 Doesn’t it equal defeat, blinking the eyes when a spear is thrown at him,$the eyes that are staring the foe down.
776 Count those as wasted days,$the days when you didn’t earn a wound in a battle.
777 The anklets of courage become ornate when they adorn$those who spurn their lives seeking lasting fame.
778 When a battle begins, the warriors who war without fear for life,$do not let their vigour reduce even when the king restrains them.
779 When he is ready to embrace death to fulfill his vow,$who can taunt him for failure.
780 If one overwhelms his patron with tears while dying for him,$death deserves to be beseeched.
781 What is better than making friends?$What better protection can there be for accomplishing a task?
782 Amongst the wise, camaraderie waxes like the crescent,$and amongst fools, wanes like the full moon.
783 The nuances of a book are enjoyed more, the deeper one reads it;$the more you nurture a friendship, the more the joy.
784 A friendship is not merely to have fun;$it is also to admonish when a friend errs.
785 Friendship is forged on shared feelings;$physical proximity or long association is inconsequential.
786 A smile on the face does not make a friendship;$a smile in the depths of the heart does.
787 Rescuing from ruin, steering along the right path,$and when in distress, sharing it, is friendship.
788 Like the hand that moves reflexively to grab a garment that slips,$a friend reacts swiftly to remove a woe.
789 Crowning glory for friendship is when$a friend supports unflinchingly in all ways.
790 “He is so dear to me; I mean so much to him” –$to even utter this, takes the lustre off friendship.
791 Nothing can be more pernicious than accepting a friend without assessing;$after accepting, there is no letting go of them.
792 Assess and assess before taking a friend,$else the ensuing anguish will be fatal.
793 Know one’s traits, roots, faults and flawless$kinship, and then forge a friendship.
794 Of high birth, and fears disgrace –$give whatever and gain the friendship.
795 When you err, they may chide you till you cry,$and show you the right way – assess and accept their friendship.
796 There is a gain in grief:$it is a tool to stretch and gauge a friend.
797 It is a gain to lose$the friendship of a fool.
798 Think not of trifles that stifle your fervor;$take not the friendship of those who desert in distress.
799 A friend who abandons in times of adversity, will torment$the heart even at death’s door.
800 Seek friendship with the impeccable; give anything$to sever ties with unbefitting allies.
801 When a friend takes the liberty to do anything, and you never hinder it,$that is called rapport.
802 Taking the liberty is a part of friendship; to oblige and salt it$is the duty of the noble.
803 What purpose does intimate friendship serve, when one can’t indulge$a friend who uses his rights to do something unsolicited.
804 Without asking, when a friend acts, presuming assent,$one accepts it as if they desired it.
805 Discern it not merely as ignorance, but as a sign of intimacy,$when a friend does an undesired act that hurts.
806 A friend who has stood by you at all times, even when he causes harm –$those who know the expanse of friendship will never let go.
807 In friendships built on love, no love is lessened$even when one does a destructive deed.
808 For one who brooks no charges against an intimate friend,$the day is made when the friend errs.
809 Friends with resolute rapport, will never let it$rupture even if the world wills it.
810 One who by nature never breaks with intimate friends$Shall be loved even by those who loathe them.
811 Their gaze may seem to guzzle you lovingly; but let the ties$with characterless friends wane than flourish.
812 Ill-suited mates who are intimate if they benefit and distant if they don’t –$does it matter if we gain them or lose them?
813 Friends who only gauge what they gain, whores who embrace only what they are paid,$and thieves are all the same.
814 Better be lonely than have the company of those,$who are like untrained horses that can’t bear you on the battlefield.
815 Regardless of what you do, petty people who can’t protect you –$it is better not to gain their vain friendship.
816 Million times worthwhile it is to be foes with the wise$than be bosom friends with the foolish.
817 Billion times rewarding it is to have adversaries$than friends who engage only in ridicule.
818 If a friend keeps shirking from doing what they are capable of,$make no fuss and let the ties wither away.
819 Bonds with those whose words and deeds differ,$alas, causes mayhem even in dreams.
820 Cosy in private and derisive in public –$allow not a hint of a link with such a person.
821 Fair-weather friendship based on opportunism than feelings$is like an anvil to take the blow when the tool has to strike.
822 Friendship with those who profess amity but lack it$will oscillate like the heart of a woman.
823 They may have learnt from many a good book$but the ungracious shall never turn good-natured.
824 The schemers with a sweet smile on the face$but devious at heart ought to be feared.
825 When the hearts don’t converge, never conclude$based on their words to embark on any task.
826 Though, like friends, they speak of what is right,$words of foes will be exposed right away.
827 The bow bends not to greet but to hurt.$Likewise, the greeting of your enemy signifies no bonhomie.
828 Hands folded in reverence may conceal a weapon;$so do the tears of your foes.
829 Exuding affection externally but harboring derision inside –$humour such people but let their friendship fade away.
830 If there comes a time for camaraderie with your adversaries,$sport it on the face but keep it out of your heart.
831 Naivete can be defined as embracing all that is detrimental$and relinquishing all that is rewarding.
832 The height of naivete is to fall in love with$what can never be one’s own.
833 Lack of remorse, having no mission, being devoid of compassion,$inability to cherish anything are traits of the witless.
834 There is no greater dolt than one who has learnt the essential texts,$grasped their essence and expounds them to others but does not abide by them.
835 The deeds of a dimwit in one life is enough$to doom him in hell for seven lifetimes.
836 If an injudicious idiot takes up a task, it is not only$destined to fail but will also land him up in fetters.
837 When great wealth falls on a fool,$strangers shall feast, while the kith and kin starve.
838 When an idiot ends up possessing something,$it resembles someone already in a groggy state getting drunk.
839 Friendship with dimwits is terribly sweet;$there is no grief when they part.
840 A fool mingling with the learned and noble$is like placing unwashed dirty feet on a clean bed.
841 Lack of wisdom is the worst that one can lack;$whatever else they lack, the world cares not.
842 If ever the unwise give wholeheartedly,$it is nothing but the result of the receiver’s penance.
843 The injury that the unintelligent can inflict on themselves –$not even their enemies can fare better.
844 What is simplemindedness but$the vain presumption of one’s own intelligence.
845 Brazenly acting out what one has not learnt$arouses doubts over that they’ve flawlessly mastered.
846 It is simpleminded to cover one’s private parts$when there is no way to mask their flaws.
847 When a precious teaching is imparted to a simpleton,$by not grasping it, they self-inflict immense harm.
848 He neither obeys others nor reasons out himself –$he is an ailment till he is alive.
849 He who shows him who can’t see, himself can’t see;$he who can’t see sees only what he sees.
850 What the (wise of the) world says exists, he denies;$he shall be deemed a ghost in this world.
851 The concomitant ills of the uncultured trait of being$at divergence with all beings is termed as discord.
852 On account of differences, if one offends us,$it is important to disregard the discord and do no harm.
853 If the distressing disease of discord is discarded,$it yields flawless fame that never fades.
854 Discord is the misery of all miseries; when it goes$the joy of all joys ensues.
855 Those who can act against their discords –$who has the capacity to consider overcoming them?
856 The life of one who relishes a spate of discords$has in its proximity suffering and demise.
857 They shall never see the transcendent truth,$those devious minds teeming with discord.
858 Siding against one’s own discord is valuable;$allowing it to accumulate invites injury.
859 When there is benefit, the discord goes unnoticed.$When it is detrimental, it seems stark.
860 All woes emanate from discord. The great wealth –$good deeds and joy for all, stems from friendly smiles.
861 Avoid hostility with the strong; unleash your enmity$on the weak failing to do so.
862 Loveless, lacks right companions, and on his own has no strengths –$how shall the might of his foes fail?
863 Timid, ignorant, unsettled and ungenerous –$he is easy prey to his foes.
864 Never ceases to be angry, ever insatiate – anytime,$anywhere, he is easy prey for anyone.
865 Doesn’t look up the right means, seizes not his opportunities, fears no ignominy,$and lacks character – his foes relish him.
866 Has unheard of and unseeing anger, and is prodigiously lustful –$enmity with him will be seized with glee.
867 He is adept at harming his own endeavours –$give anything to gain his enmity.
868 Shorn of good qualities, filled with flaws, free of allies –$he is the best safeguard for his foes.
869 Rapturous joy never ends for aggressors$who gain as foes, the foolish and fearful .
870 Ignorant, irritable and disinclined to earn a trifle –$fame never favours him.
871 Enmity is an oddity that is best$left undesired even in jest.
872 You may gain the enmity of the ploughman wielding a bow as plough$but not that of the one wielding the word.
873 One who, alone, antagonizes many,$has a dimmer wit than a loony.
874 The one with the virtue of turning a foe into a friend –$the world shall rest under the sway of his virtuosity.
875 If one has no allies but two foes,$better befriend one of them.
876 Whether you’ve qualified someone as a foe or not,$in troubled times, it is better not to get cozy nor split.
877 Express not your pain to those who can’t empathize;$expose not your frailties to your foes.
878 Knowing oneself and one’s foes, and preparing oneself is the self defence$that surely shall quell the vanity of the enemy.
879 Weed out a thorn tree when it is still slender;$once fully grown, it’ll slash the hands of the weeder.
880 One who can’t crush the conceit of the enemy,$will be vanquished the moment they hiss.
881 Even shade and water, when noxious, can be baneful;$kith and kin, when malicious, can be harmful.
882 Fear not foes, overt like swords; but those faking as friends –$fear the ties with them.
883 Fear internal strife and protect yourself; during trouble, like a tool$that cuts wet clay, it will hurt without fail.
884 When internal strife that disconcerts minds appears,$it gives rise to flaws that unsettle the kith.
885 If internal conflicts surface amongst the kin,$many a destructive flaw is aroused.
886 If disharmony crops up among those who are at one with each other,$infallibility is impossible to achieve.
887 Though it appears well joint like a copper vessel,$a house ridden with internal strifes shall never jell.
888 Like a metal abraded by a file,$the might of a clan is eroded by enemies within.
889 It maybe tiny as a split sesame,$but disaster resides in internal strife.
890 Life with those whose hearts are not in harmony$is like staying in a hut with a snake for company.
891 For those keen on self-preservation, the prominent concern$is not to belittle the capabilities of the capable.
892 If we rankle those worthy of veneration,$they can cause unceasing tribulation.
893 If you are keen on self destruction, act with disregard$and denigrate those who can destroy at will.
894 The incapable venturing to harm the capable,$is like waving a welcome to the deity of death.
895 Wherever one flees, and forever, there can be no respite,$after enraging a ruler with fiery might.
896 One may survive being fried in a fire$but not after offending the venerable.
897 Of what use are a life good in all aspects, and immense wealth,$if one infuriates men of outstanding greatness and prowess.
898 They, who seem tenacious, with their clans shall perish from this world,$if august men, great as a mountain, are slighted.
899 An emperor, one may be, but he shall be derailed and his reign wrecked,$if persons with lofty ideals are incensed.
900 One may have the best of allies but cannot survive$the wrath of those with the best of qualities.
901 One who forever acts out of fervor for his wife never attains anything worthy;$this is the trait that those who focus on execution shun.
902 Without preserving the good, driven by the desire for the woman-$the wealth made thus is a greatly disconcerting disgrace.
903 Stooping to go against the grain by submitting to the wife’s will,$always embarrasses good men.
904 There is no salvation for one who fears his wife;$never can he achieve fame nor mastery over execution.
905 One who fears his wife will forever fear$doing good to the good folk.
906 One may live amongst the celestial beings but has no standing,$if he fears the drooping of the shapely shoulders of his wife.
907 The demure woman deserves more acclaim$than the manliness that dances to the woman’s tune.
908 One who caters to the whims of her, with elegant brows,$shall never do any good nor resolve any of his friends’ woes.
909 Virtuous deeds, valuable possession and various pursuits$are beyond those who do what the wife bids.
910 Cultured hearts with precious thoughts allow not$the folly of appeasing their consorts.
911 Bedecked with bracelets, she seeks him not for love but money –$her saccharine words are charged with disgrace.
912 Discern and spurn$pretentious women who schemingly gloat.
913 The fake cuddling of women coveting money$is like hugging an unknown corpse in a dark room.
914 The wise who seek the way of compassion$are not swayed by trivial pleasures of covetous women.
915 Wise men renowned for their sagacity shun$the trite frolics of women who profess love for all.
916 Those who care for themselves care not for$the shoulders of those who offer exaggerated banal joys.
917 Those with discontented hearts embrace the shoulders$of those who make love with devious thoughts in their hearts.
918 Those who cannot reason wisely see a divine enchantress$in a dubious woman’s embrace.
919 Soft shoulders of loose women, decked with jewels,$is the hell where imprudent louts dwell.
920 Deceitful women, drink and dice$are friends of those carelessly dumping their wealth.
921 They shall not be respected nor feared, and they shall lose their glory –$they who are in love with alcohol.
922 Consume not alcohol; consume if you will,$those who care not to be held highly by the noble.
923 Drunken revelry is horrid in front of your mother;$how would it seem in front of the esteemed?
924 The good lady, Sense of Shame, will turn her back on$those despicably guilty of being drunk.
925 They have no sense of consequences,$those who pay to lose their senses.
926 One who is asleep is no different from the dead;$one who consumes alcohol forever consumes poison.
927 Those who are in a perpetual drunken stupor$shall be sneered at by the knowing locals.
928 Drop the pretense of never feeling merry while drinking;$all that’s hidden in your heart will tumble out.
929 Making an intoxicated person see reason$is like pursuing with a flame, someone under water .
930 While sober, will he not think of his crapulence$when he sees others sloshed under the influence?
931 Love not gambling even when you win.$To win is akin to a fish biting the metallic hook on a fishing line.
932 Can there ever be a rewarding course of life$for a gambler who wins one to lose a hundred.
933 If one keeps calling as the dice roll,$their wealth shall roll away to others.
934 Nothing else can cause as much poverty as$the degrading and demeaning gambling.
935 The dice, the casino and the playing hand –$those who lovingly embrace these lose everything.
936 When one is enclasped by Gambling, the Imp of Misfortune,$they shall starve and suffer.
937 When one enters the gambling den at dawn,$their character and inheritance decline.
938 It erodes wealth and imposes falsehood –$gambling that causes torment and erases tenderness.
939 Food, dress, learning, wealth and fame – these five$elude one who takes to the dice.
940 Like the spirit that yet loves the body in torment,$the gambler loves to wager despite the losses.
941 Food and deed, both in excess and deficit, cause disease,$induced by the three (humors) listed by the learned, starting with wind.
942 The body needs no medicine,$if one eats after ensuring the earlier intake is digested.
943 After digestion, eat in right measure. This is the way$for the possessor of the body to prolong its being.
944 After ascertaining digestion, when you feel quite hungry,$eat, in right measure, food that suits your constitution.
945 If one eats after refusing incompatible food$there is no harm for their existence.
946 Joy resides with one who knows what not and how much to eat.$Likewise, disease rests with the glutton.
947 One who cannot judge his extent of hunger and gobbles up greedily$will be afflicted with boundless malady.
948 Diagnose the disease, detect its root cause,$discern its cure and then act aptly.
949 The learned medic should consider the state of the ailing,$the extent of ailment and the timing, and then treat.
950 The ailing, the medic, the medicine and the caregiver$– the treatment encompasses all these four.
951 Those of good birth stand apart through their$sense of justice and sense of shame that come naturally for them.
952 Propriety, truth and modesty: those of good birth$do not lapse on these three.
953 Those born in a family that treasures truth internalize these four:$smile, generosity, sweet words and not belittling anyone.
954 Even if they are bound to gain millions,$those of good lineage shall never stoop to do things beneath themselves.
955 Their ability to give may dwindle, but those of ancient lineage$do not depart from their character.
956 Those who seek to live in harmony with their families, of flawless descent,$do not do unworthy deeds spurred by vengeance and deceit.
957 Any fault in a person of good descent stands out$like the wart on the moon of the sky.
958 If lack of compassion is seen while considering the welfare of others,$aspersions are cast on their ancestry.
959 The sprouting shoots betray the seed hidden in the soil;$words spoken portray the nature of their families.
960 If one cares for his wellbeing, he needs a sense of shame;$if one cares for his family, he needs to be humble before anyone.
961 It maybe essential and important, yet,$let it go, if it is beneath your dignity.
962 Fame and riches may beckon but they’d not do ignoble deeds,$those who seek high-mindedness besides honour.
963 In times of prosperity, humility is needed;$but during poverty, don your pride.
964 When people slip beneath their dignified state,$they are lowly as hair fallen from the head.
965 A base act, as minor as a rosary pea,$will make those, as towering as a mountain, to shrivel.
966 It leads not to earthly fame, nor to a divine land;$why then must one scamper behind those who revile them.
967 Better to be known that he died without stooping low,$than live by depending on those who humiliate him.
968 Living on to preserve your body, when the greatness$of your character is gone – is that an elixir of life?
969 The kavarimaa will cease living if a shred of hair is lost;$likewise, there are those who’ll shed their lives, if disgraced.
970 The world shall revere their fame,$those who are proud enough to face death than ignominy.
971 Reputation rests on possession of passion;$It’s a disgrace to strive to live if ‘tis foregone.
972 All beings are born equal. Distinction$Comes with difference in deeds.	
973 Eminent in stature, but not eminent in deed, is no eminence$Lowly in stature, but not lowly in deed, is no lowliness.
974 Like women of virtue, greatness exists$Due to steadfast adherence to its virtues.
975 Those who are bestowed with greatness$Do deeds that aren’t commonplace.
976 The petty do not have it in them, the foresight$To embrace and emulate the great.
977 The undeserving, if eminence graces,$Pompous, lowly conduct ensues.
978 Greatness has forever humility$Pettiness wallows in vanity.
979 Greatness is devoid of pride$Pettiness is perfused with bombast.
980 Greatness masks others’ failings$Pettiness keeps wailing.
981 For those who dutifully strive to be noble,$To do all that’s good is seen as natural.
982 Being good within, is nobility;$All else is no quality.
983 Love, compunction, beneficence, compassion and truthfulness:$On these five columns rests nobleness.
984 The virtue of the ascetic is to not kill any being;$The virtue of the noble is to never resort to blaming.
985 Humility is the vital capability of the capable:$To convert foes, the weapon of the noble.
986 The mark of nobility, if you ask,$Is to concede with grace, defeat by the underdog.
987 Of what use is being noble$If one can’t do good unto those who did evil.
988 Poverty is no disgrace if you possess$The strength of nobleness.
989 Those known to be the ocean of nobility aren’t perturbed$Even when there is the proverbial Flood.
990 If the nobility of the noble does erode,$The vast earth cannot bear its load.
991 Affability with all will help achieve with ease$The quality of being courteous.
992 A kind heart and good heredity are considered$To make the quality of being well-mannered.
993 Physical resemblance makes not people similar$Similar qualities make them similar.
994 Being likeable and righteous, they serve all-$Their good character the world shall extol.
995 One who discerns others’ nature and sees merit in foes,$Won’t deride others for a laugh that causes many woes.
996 The world exists because of courteous people$Else it’ll perish by sinking in its own soil.
997 But for humanity, they are but a tree,$Though sharp as a rasp they may be.
998 Even with those, hostile, and callously act,$Behaving ungraciously is a blot.
999 For those with no faculty to have fun$Darkness swamps the large earth despite the sun.
1000 Good milk spoiled by the vessel that is stained$Is wealth in the hands of the uncultured.
1001 Wealth allover the house stashed but is not used$Makes one impotent as if he is deceased.
1002 Wealth is all, thinking thus, clinging and being ungenerous,$Is a delusion leading to a birth most inglorious.
1003 They seek to gain wealth but not fame, being mean:$The presence of such men is earth’s burden.
1004 What’d he think is the legacy he’ll leave,$He who has nobody’s love?
1005 Many billions one may make, but it means nothing$If one is neither spending nor giving.
1006 Wealth is a malady, when oneself it doesn’t serve$And to the deserving, one isn’t disposed to give.
1007 A maiden of bounteous merit, being single, if greyed:$Such is wealth that is not used to aid the deprived.
1008 Wealth of a person, who is loved by none,$Is a toxic fruit tree in the middle of a town.
1009 Devoid of love and denying oneself,$Wealth gained with no scruples, others shall seize.
1010 When the famed wealthy go through poverty$They resemble clouds that lost their bounty.
1011 Compunction is having scruples about one’s action$Distinct from demureness of pretty-browed fine women.
1012 Need for food and feeling of fear are common for all beings$Compunction is the distinctive feature of mankind.
1013 Food is the basis for all lives, the goodness$Of compunction is the basis for nobleness.
1014 For the noble, having compunction is an adornment;$Without it, ain’t their proud stride an ailment?
1015 If blame for others and self, moves one to the same sense of shame$The world shall call them the home for compunction.
1016 Great men desire not the vast world under their reign$Without the protective fence of compunction.
1017 Their lives they may shed but never their scruples to save their lives$They who by their scruples ever abide.
1018 If what shames others doesn’t raise in him a qualm$Virtue’ll flee him feeling that shame.
1019 The family is hurt if one breaches convention$All good is spoilt if there is lack of compunction.
1020 The actions of those who, deep within, have no compunction$Is akin to a stringed puppet seeming alive, an illusion.
1021 To proclaim, “I shall never take my hands off” to do one’s duty$No acclaim can match that dignity.
1022 Tasks one takes on with persistence and profound wisdom –$The people shall prosper through them.
1023 “I’ll serve my people,” for the one who so said$God shall gird up his robes and rush to his aid.
1024 When for his kindred, one perseveres without respite:$With no contriving, on its own, it’ll turn out right.
1025 Doing no wrong, the one who serves his kin –$The world shall embrace as its own.
1026 One will be known for his imposing command when$He takes command of the house where he was born.
1027 Like the bravehearts do on a battlefield$The ablest takes charge of the household.
1028 To serve one’s people look not for the ripe hour$Being lethargic and ego-centric makes all suffer.
1029 Is his body the bin for all stress$Who shields his kin from distress?
1030 The people who have not a good man to lean on$Shall fall with their base shorn by some affliction.
1031 The world tails the plough despite other pursuit$Even if one toils, farming remains foremost.
1032 Farmers are the linchpin of the world$All others not farming, it does hold.
1033 Only they live, who eat from what they plough$Others follow, and to eat, they kowtow.
1034 Who bring their land under their crops’ shade$Many states under their king’s reign shall bade.
1035 They never beg, nor deny others, givin’ what they seek$Whose nature is to eat what they till and make.
1036 If tillers fold their hands still, sages who say$“I’ve given up desire,” as such cannot stay.
1037 If one measure of soil, is turned fine and dried to a quarter,$Good yield needs not a handful of manure.
1038 Worthier than ploughing is to manure the field;$Weeding done, worthier than watering is to secure the yield.
1039 If from the land, her master stays off$Like a wife, she’ll sulk and start a tiff.
1040 Mother Earth laughs at the sight$of those who remain idle pleading poverty.
1041 If you ask, what torments more than poverty:$Only poverty can torment more than poverty.
1042 Poverty is a wretch;$This life and the next does it snatch.
1043 Ancestral legacy and parlance crumble in totality$Due to hankering caused by poverty.
1044 From the high-born too, vile words may be born$When deprivation makes them so cast down.
1045 From the one misery named penury$Emanates many a worry.
1046 After deep reflection they may say words of deep essence$Yet what the poor say may be seen to have no sense.
1047 Poverty aligned to no virtue makes even one’s mother$Who bore him, to see him as a misfit.
1048 Did not my poverty kill me yesterday?$Does it have to be back again today?
1049 One may snatch a nap amidst raging fire$But can not sleep a wink in poverty dire.
1050 When want does not make one give up desire$It spells doom for salt and sour gruel next door.
1051 Seeks alms if you find those worthy of benefaction;$If they refuse, blame is theirs and not yours.
1052 Seeking alms causes us great delight$If what is sought is got without any plight.
1053 With ungrudging hearts, they view charity as a duty$To stand before them and beg – there’s a beauty!
1054 They know not withholding even in their dreams$Same as giving it seems, asking them for alms.
1055 That the world has them who give and nothing conceal$Is why others appear before them and for alms appeal.
1056 When we see those without the folly of concealing$Gone are all the ills of having nothing.
1057 Seeing givers who do not mock and deride$The heart delights and rejoices deep inside.
1058 If there be no mendicants, this vast moist world$Will resemble wooden puppets that come and go.
1059 Ah, what is there to brag about those who give$If there be none to seek and gladly receive.
1060 The denied mendicant should never feel indignant$The pain of poverty is proof enough of its worth.
1061 Not concealing, they give with joy, and are as dear as eyes;$Yet, to resist asking even from them is worth millions.
1062 Having to beg for survival, if anyone is destined,$The Maker of this world be damned.
1063 Nothing can be more brazen than$Banking on charity to end deprivation.
1064 No place is adequate to hold their nobility$When, in direst straits, they seek no charity.
1065 Mere gruel made of clear water tastes sweetest$When it is earned through earnest effort.
1066 Nothing but begging shames the tongue more$Even if what is sought is water for the cow.
1067 I beg of all beggars: beg if you must,$But beg not from those who conceal.
1068 The fragile boat of begging will be wrecked$When it knocks against the rock of refusal.
1069 When I think of those who beg, my heart melts;$When I think of those who refuse, it wilts.
1070 When one asks but is denied, his life departs;$Where will he hide, the one who denies.
1071 By all appearances, the vile look so human;$Such resemblance, I’ve nowhere seen.
1072 More gifted than those who know the right course$Are the vile: their hearts have no remorse.
1073 Those who are base are like Devas$They are free to do as they please.
1074 When they meet brutish people unfettered by scruples$The lowest of the low take pride in surpassing them.
1075 The conformity of the vile is forced by fear$And perhaps, a wee bit by desire.
1076 Like the broadcasting drum are the vile,$Revealing everything confidential.
1077 The vile will not even wiggle their smeared dining fingers$Unless their cheeks are cracked by a clenched fist.
1078 A word is enough to move the noble to help;$Crushed like a sugarcane, the vile maybe of some use.
1079 When they see others well fed and well dressed$The vile are adept at getting their flaws exposed.
1080 When in trouble, themselves, the vile swiftly sell.$What else do they have as a skill?
1081 She with sturdy studs$Is she an angel?$A peafowl special?$Or just a damsel?$My heart is dazzled.
1082 The girl who I gazed at,$With the gaze she returned$She seemed to resemble$A bellicose angel$Coming with an army.
1083 What is known as Death$I knew not before.$Now I do. She comes$With feminine graces$And immense warring eyes.
1084 The eyes of this naive girl$With feminine graces$Are warring with looks that devour the lives of those who see her.
1085 Is that Death? Or eyes? Or doe?$The gaze of the young lass, has all these three.
1086 If only her cruel brows$Were not bent (as a bow)$Her eyes would not shoot$So much misery$That makes me quiver.
1087 As a robe over$a rutting elephant$That covers its eyes$Lies a veil over$Her shapely bosom.
1088 My valour which forced even foes$Who never faced me in battle$To fear me$Lies shattered before$Her glowing brow.
1089 Adorned with the innocent$Gaze of a gazelle,$And modesty to boot,$Of what use to her are jewels$Made of extrinsic materials.
1090 Brewed spirits intoxicate$Only when they are consumed.$They cannot, like love,$Enthrall even those$Who merely behold.
1091 Her gorging eyes$Have two gazes.$One gaze inflicts the malady.$The other gaze is remedy$For that malady.
1092 Her furtive eyes$Steal a fleeting look.$Half the love$Lies in it,$nay much more.
1093 She looked at me.$Looking, she turned coy.$That was how$She watered$The crop of our love.
1094 When I look at her$She stares at the ground.$When I turn my gaze$She looks at me$And smiles gently.
1095 Her look lets out$Not a single cue.$Coyly she smiles$As if she meant$Something else.
1096 She speaks as if$She is hostile.$She feigns anger.$I do sense soon$What she does mean.
1097 Harsh words with no real anger,$And a put-on angry stare:$These are the cues;$She seems hostile$but loves me true.
1098 A certain beauty lies$In this pliant girl:$Oh, the way she smiles,$Gently, her heart melting,$When I look at her!
1099 We give each other$Such distant looks$Like we’re strangers.$Only lovers$Can do that.
1100 When my eyes$Meet her eyes,$And concur,$Spoken words$Have no use.
1101 The five senses of$Sight, aural, taste, smell and touch$Come alive$Only with this girl$Of gleaming bangles.
1102 For any disease$The cure lies elsewhere.$My girl decked with jewels$Is herself the cure for$The ailment she induced.
1103 When we find on the one we love$A soft shoulder to sleep on,$Can it be sweeter –$The divine world of$the lotus-eyed god?
1104 It sears when I go far$It chills when I get near$Such a fire$Wherefrom did$She acquire?
1105 The moment I desire anything$That very thing they seem to be:$The shoulders of her$Whose tresses flow down$adorned with flowers.
1106 Whenever she embraces me$Her touch, o her touch$Is so good, my life sprouts afresh!$This artless maiden’s arms$Are for sure made of nectar.
1107 Cuddling this woman,$Her complexion that of mango,$Wow! it is much the same as$Feeding others and sharing with them$Hard earned wealth from our house.
1108 We both desire each other$And delightful it is$Our tight hug$Which lets nothing betwixt$Not even air.
1109 Pouting after a tiff,$Patching up and making out,$These are the perks$Gained by those$United in love.
1110 The more we learn, the more we learn$There is much unknown.$Same it is with love,$The more I lie with the bejewelled girl$The more I learn there are joys untold.
1111 Bless you Anicham flower,$You’re soft, no doubt!$More delicate$Than you, is she$Who I covet.
1112 How you’re seduced, my heart,$When you see a flower.$Flowers seen by all,$You are mistaken,$Are not her eyes.
1113 She of supple arms,$Tender-sprouts her body,$Pearly is her smile,$Heady is her smell,$Spear-like her smeared eyes.
1114 Feeling it’s no match,$Lily would wilt down$And stare at the ground$If it sees the eyes of her$Who wears graceful jewels.
1115 She has worn anicham flower$Without pinching out its stalk.$Her slender waist$May no more hear$Auspicious drums.
1116 The stars have become confused in their places$Unable to discern between the moon$ And my maiden's face
1117 The glistening moon$That wanes and waxes$Is marred by vacant spaces.$Is there a single taint$On my maiden’s face?
1118 Long live moon!$I shall love you too$If only$You can be radiant$As my girl’s face.
1119 She has eyes like a broad flower.$Moon,$If you can resemble her face$You need not appear$For everyone to see.
1120 Anicham flower$And a swan’s* feather:$Under milady’s feet,$They are nothing but$Nerunji thorn fruit.
1121 He said:$Milk mixed with honey it is$Saliva springing$From her mouth$With shiny teeth$And sweet words.
1122 What is the soul$to the body?$Such is the bond$Between me$And my lady.
1123 Pupil of my eye,$Go away!$There ain’t room enough$For the girl I love$She with a fine brow.
1124 The girl decked with splendid jewels$Is my very life$When she is with me,$And brings on death$When she leaves me.
1125 I shall remember$The nature of her$With bright warring eyes$If I ever forget her;$But I know not forgetting.
1126 She said:$He never leaves my eyes.$When I blink, he remains$And yet stays unhurt.$He – my love,$Is exceptional.
1127 My beloved resides$Within my eyes.$I never paint them$Lest he vanishes$For that brief time.
1128 My beloved resides$Within my heart.$I fear eating food$That is steaming hot$Lest he gets burnt.
1129 If I shut my eyes$He would be veiled;$Knowing this I sleep not.$Hence the townsfolk$Call him uncaring.
1130 He lives with delight$Always in my heart.$But the townsfolk$Call him loveless$As he dwells apart.
1131 For those pining due to$Unrequited love –$How else can they draw strength$Than ride the mock ‘palm-horse’$To proclaim love and get relief.
1132 The body and the soul$Able to bear no more$Have shed their reserve$That inhibits riding$The 'palm-horse', declaring love.
1133 Shyness and chivalry$I possessed once before.$All I am left with now$Is the mock palm-horse$The love-struck men mount.
1134 The gusting stream$Of love and lust$Will sweep away$My raft of modesty$And manly gallantry.
1135 She of small bangles$Beaded with garlands$Has left me withThe mock palm-horse$And blues of the dusk.
1136 My eyes refuse sleep$‘Cos of this naive girl.$Even at midnight$I think of mounting$The horse of palm fronds.
1137 She said:$Pining is aroused$By a sea of love.$Yet, we don’t mount the palm-horse.$What can indeed be better$Than to be born a woman?
1138 Love spared me not$For my reserve that is rare$Nor thought I deserve pity.$It has breached my covertness$And come out in the open.
1139 No one knows, thinking so$The love I conceal$Has revealed itself$On the streets via$Whispers and gossip.
1140 Ignorant folks$Sneer at me$When they see me.$Ah, they haven’t been through$What I have undergone.
1141 My precious life is saved by the raise of rumour, and this,$to my good luck no others are aware of.
1142 Not knowing the value of her whose eyes are like flowers$this town has got up a rumour about me.
1143 The rumour spread within the town, is it not gain to me?$It is as though that were obtained that may not be.
1144 The rumour rising makes my love to rise;$My love would lose its power and languish otherwise.
1145 The more man drinks, the more he ever drunk would be;$The more my love's revealed, the sweeter 'tis to me! .
1146 It was but a single day that I looked on (my lover); $but the rumour thereof has spread like the seizure of the moon by the serpent.
1147 My anguish grows apace: the town's report$Manures it; my mother's word waters it.
1148 To say that one could extinguish passion by rumour$is like extinguishing fire with ghee.
1149 When the departure of him who said "fear not" has put me to shame before others,$why need I be ashamed of scandal.
1150 If we desire, who loves will grant what we require;$This town sends forth the rumour we desire!.
1151 If it is not departure, tell me;$but if it is your speedy return, tell it to those who would be alive then.
1152 It once was perfect joy to look upon his face;$But now the fear of parting saddens each embrace.
1153 To trust henceforth is hard, if ever he depart,$Even he, who knows his promise and my breaking heart.
1154 If he depart, who fondly said, 'Fear not,' what blame's incurred$By those who trusted to his reassuring word?.
1155 If you would save my life, restrain him from going, he who fills my life!$If he depart, hardly we meet again.
1156 To cherish longing hope that he should ever gracious be,$Is hard, when he could stand, and of departure speak to me.
1157 The bracelet slipping from my wrist announced before$Departure of the Prince that rules the ocean shore.
1158 Painful is it to live in a friendless town;$but far more painful is it to part from one's lover.
1159 Fire burns when touched; but, the sickness of love even burns when removed.
1160 As if there were many indeed that can consent to the impossible, kill their pain,$endure separation and yet continue to live afterwards.
1161 I would conceal my pain, but see! it surging and swells,$As streams to those that draw from ever-springing wells.
1162 I cannot hide this pain of mine, yet shame restrains$When I would tell it out to him who caused my pains.
1163 My soul, like porter's pole, within my wearied frame,$Sustains a two-fold burthen poised, of love and shame.
1164 A sea of love, 'tis true, I see stretched out before,$But not the trusty raft that crosses safely to shore.
1165 Who work us woe in friendship's trustful hour,$What will they prove when angry tempests lower?
1166 The pleasure of lust is (as great as) the sea;$but the pain of lust is far greater.
1167 I have swam across the terrible flood of lust, but have not seen its shore;$even at midnight I am alone; still I live.
1168 All living souls in slumber soft she steeps;$But me alone kind night for her companing keeps!
1169 The long lone nights of these days are far more cruel$than the heartless one who is torturing me.
1170 When eye of mine would as my soul go forth to him,$It knows not how through floods of its own tears to swim.
1171 They showed me him, and then my endless pain$I saw: why then should weeping eyes complain?
1172 How glancing eyes, that rash unweeting looked that day,$With sorrow measureless are wasting now away!
1173 They themselves looked eagerly (on him) and now they weep.$Is not this to be laughed at?
1174 Those eyes have wept till all the fount of tears is dry,$That brought upon me pain that knows no remedy.
1175 The eye that wrought me more than sea could hold of woes,$Is suffering pangs that banish all repose.
1176 The eyes that have given me this disease have themselves been seized with this (suffering).$Oh! I am much delighted.
1177 Aching, aching, let those exhaust their stream,$That melting, melting, that day gazed on him.
1178 He is indeed here who loved me with his lips but not with his heart but$my eyes suffer from not seeing him.
1179 When he is away they do not sleep; when he is present they do not sleep;$In either case, mine eyes endure unbearable agony.
1180 It is not difficult for the people of this place to understand the secret of those whose eyes,$like mine, are as it were beaten drums.
1181 I willed my lover absent should remain;$Of pining's sickly hue to whom shall I complain?
1182 'He gave': this sickly hue thus proudly speaks,$Then climbs, and all my frame its chariot makes.
1183 He has taken (away) my beauty and modesty,$and given me instead disease and sallowness.
1184 I think (of him); and what I speak about is but his excellence;$still is there sallowness; and this is deceitful.
1185 My lover there went forth to roam;$This pallor of my frame usurps his place at home.
1186 As darkness waits till lamp expires, to fill the place,$This pallor waits till I enjoy no more my lord's embrace.
1187 I lay in his embrace, I turned unwittingly;$Forthwith this hue, as you might grasp it, came on me.
1188 Besides those who say "she has turned sallow"$there are none who say "he has forsaken her".
1189 If he is clear of guilt who has conciliated me (to his departure)$let my body suffer its due and turn sallow.
1190 'Tis well, though men deride me for my sickly hue of pain;$If they from calling him unkind, who won my love, refrain.
1191 The women who are beloved by those whom they love,$have they have not got the stone-less fruit of sexual delight ?
1192 The bestowal of love by the beloved on those who love them$is like the rain raining (at the proper season) on those who live by it.
1193 Who love and are beloved to them alone$Belongs the boast, 'We've made life's very joys our own.'
1194 Those well-beloved will luckless prove,$Unless beloved by those they love.
1195 He who is beloved by me,$what will he do to me, if I am not beloved by him ?
1196 Love on one side is bad; like balanced load$By porter borne, love on both sides is good.
1197 Would not cupid who abides and contends in one party (only)$witness the pain and sorrow (in that party)?
1198 There is no one in the world so hard-hearted$as those who can live without receiving (even) a kind word from their beloved.
1199 Though he my heart desires no grace accords to me,$Yet every accent of his voice is melody.
1200 Tell him thy pain that loves not thee?$Farewell, my soul, fill up the sea!
1201 From thought of her unfailing gladness springs,$Sweeter than palm-rice wine the joy love brings.
1202 How great is love! Behold its sweetness past belief!$Think on the lover, and the spirit knows no grief.
1203 A fit of sneezing threatened, but it passed away;$He seemed to think of me, but do his fancies stray?
1204 He continues to abide in my soul,$do I likewise abide in his?
1205 He who has imprisoned me in his soul,$is he ashamed to enter incessantly into mine.
1206 I live by remembering my (former) intercourse with him;$if it were not so, how could I live?
1207 I have never forgotten (the pleasure);$even to think of it burns my soul; could I live, if I should ever forget it?
1208 He will not be angry however much I may think of him;$is it not so much the delight my beloved affords me ?
1209 My precious life is wasting away$by thinking too much on the cruelty of him who said we were not different.
1210 May you live, O Moon! Do not set,$that I mine see him who has departed without quitting my soul.
1211 It came and brought to me, that nightly vision rare,$A message from my love,- what feast shall I prepare?
1212 If my dark, carp-like eye will close in sleep, as I implore,$The tale of my long-suffering life I'll tell my loved one.
1213 My life lasts because in my dream I behold him$who does not favour me in my waking hours.
1214 There is pleasure in my dream,$because in it I seek and obtain him who does not visit me in my wakefulness.
1215 I saw him in my waking hours, and then it was pleasant;$I see him just now in my dream, and it is (equally) pleasant.
1216 Were there no such thing as wakefulness,$my beloved (who visited me) in my dream would not depart from me.
1217 The cruel one who would not favour me in my wakefulness,$what right has he to torture me in my dreams?
1218 When I am asleep he rests on my shoulders,$(but) when I awake he hastens into my soul.
1219 They who have no dear ones to behold in their dreams$blame him who visits me not in my waking hours.
1220 The women of this place say he has forsaken me in my wakefulness.$I think they have not seen him visit me in my dreams.
1221 Live, O you evening are you (the former) evening?$No, you are the season that slays (married) women
1222 A long life to you, O dark evening! You are sightless. Is your help-mate (also) as hard-hearted as mine.
1223 The evening that (once) came in with trembling and dimness (now) brings me an aversion for life and increasing sorrow.
1224 In the absence of my lover, evening comes in like slayers on the field of slaughter.
1225 What good have I done to morning (and) what evil to evening?
1226 The pangs that evening brings I never knew,$Till he, my wedded spouse, from me withdrew.
1227 This malady buds forth in the morning, expands all day long and blossoms in the evening.
1228 The shepherd's flute now sounds as a fiery forerunner of night, and is become a weapon that slays (me).
1229 When night comes on confusing (everyone's) mind, the (whole) town will lose its sense and be plunged in sorrow.
1230 My (hitherto) unextinguished life is now lost in this bewildering night at the thought of him who has the nature of wealth.
1231 While we endure the unbearable sorrow, your eyes weep for him who is gone afar, and shun (the sight of) fragrant flowers.
1232 The discoloured eyes that shed tears profusely seem to betray the unkindness of our beloved.
1233 The shoulders that swelled on the day of our union (now) seem to announce our separation clearly (to the public).
1234 In the absence of your consort, your shoulders having lost their former beauty and fulness, your bracelets of pure gold have become loose.
1235 The (loosened) bracelets, and the shoulders from which the old beauty has faded, relate the cruelty of the pitiless one.
1236 I am greatly pained to hear you call him a cruel man, just because your shoulders are reduced and your bracelets loosened.
1237 Can you O my soul! gain glory by relating to the (so-called) cruel one the clamour of my fading shoulders?.
1238 When I once loosened the arms that were in embrace, the forehead of the gold-braceleted women turned sallow.
1239 When but a breath of breeze penetrated our embrace, her large cool eyes became sallow.
1240 Was it at the sight of what the bright forehead had done that the sallowness of her eyes became sad?
1241 O my soul, will you not think and tell me some medicine be it what it may, that can cure this incurable malady?.
1242 May you live, O my soul! While he is without love, for you to suffer is (simple) folly.
1243 O my soul! why remain (here) and suffer thinking (of him)? There are no lewd thoughts (of you) in him who has caused you this disease of sorrow.
1244 O my soul! take my eyes also with you, (if not), these would eat me up (in their desire) to see him.
1245 O my soul! can he who loves not though he is beloved, be forsaken saying he hates me (now)?
1246 O my soul! when you see the dear one who remove dislike by intercourse, you are displeased and continue to be so. Nay, your displeasure is (simply) false.
1247 O my good soul, give up either lust or honour, as for me I can endure neither.
1248 You are a fool, O my soul! to go after my departed one, while you mourn that he is not kind enough to favour you.
1249 O my soul! to whom would you repair, while the dear one is within yourself?.
1250 If I retain in my heart him who has left me without befriending me, I shall lose even the (inward) beauty that remains.
1251 My precious life is saved by the raise of rumour, and this, to my good luck no others are aware of.
1252 Even at midnight is my mind worried by lust, and this one thing, alas! is without mercy.
1253 I would conceal my lust, but alas, it yields not to my will but breaks out like a sneeze.
1254 I say I would be firm, but alas, my malady breaks out from its concealment and appears in public.
1255 The dignity that would not go after an absent lover is not known to those who are sticken by love.
1256 The sorrow I have endured by desiring to go after my absent lover, in what way is it excellent?.
1257 I know nothing like shame when my beloved does from love (just) what is desired (by me).
1258 Are not the enticing words of my trick-abounding roguish lover the weapon that breaks away my feminine firmness?.
1259 I said I would feign dislike and so went (away); (but) I embraced him the moment I say my mind began to unite with him!
1260 Is it possible for those whose hearts melt like fat in the fire to say they can feign a strong dislike and remain so?
1261 My finger has worn away by marking (on the wall) the days he has been absent while my eyes have lost their lustre and begin to fail.
1262 O you bright-jewelled maid, if I forget (him) today, my shoulders will lose their beauty even in the other life and make my bracelets loose.
1263 Still live by longing for the arrival of him who has gone out of love for victory and with valour as his guide.
1264 My heart is rid of its sorrow and swells with rapture to think of my absent lover returning with his love.
1265 May I look on my lover till I am satisfied and thereafter will vanish the sallowness of my slender shoulders.
1266 May my husband return some day; and then will I enjoy (him) so as to destroy all this agonizing sorrow.
1267 This malady (of lust) is manured by the talk of women and watered by the (harsh) words of my mother.
1268 Let the king fight and gain (victories); (but) let me be united to my wife and feast the evening.
1269 To those who suffer waiting for the day of return of their distant lovers one day is as long as seven days.
1270 After (my wife) has died of a broken heart, what good will there be if she is to receive me, has received me, or has even embraced me?
1271 Though you would conceal (your feelings), your painted eyes would not, for, transgressing (their bounds), they tell (me) something.
1272 Unusually great is the female simplicity of your maid whose beauty fills my eyes and whose shoulders resemble the bamboo.
1273 There is something that is implied in the beauty of this woman, like the thread that is visible in a garland of gems.
1274 There is something in the unmatured smile of this maid like the fragrance that is contained in an unblossomed bud.
1275 The well-meant departure of her whose bangles are tight-fitting contains a remedy that can cure my great sorrow.
1276 The embrace that fills me with comfort and gladness is capable of enduring (my former) sorrow and meditating on his want of love.
1277 My bracelets have understood before me the (mental) separation of him who rules the cool seashore.
1278 It was but yesterday my lover departed (from me); and it is seven days since my complexion turned sallow.
1279 She looked at her bracelets, her tender shoulders, and her feet; this was what she did there (significantly).
1280 To express their love-sickness by their eyes and resort to begging bespeaks more than ordinary female excellence.
1281 To please by thought and cheer by sight is peculiar, not to liquor but lust.
1282 If women have a lust that exceeds even the measure of the palmyra fruit, they will not desire (to feign) dislike even as much as the millet.
1283 Though my eyes disregard me and do what is pleasing to my husband, still will they not be satisfied unless they see him.
1284 O my friend! I was prepared to feign displeasure but my mind forgetting it was ready to embrace him.
1285 Like the eyes which see not the pencil that paints it, I cannot see my husband's fault (just) when I meet him.
1286 When I see my husband, I do not see any faults; but when I do not see him, I do not see anything but faults.
1287 Like those who leap into a stream which they know will carry them off, why should a wife feign dislike which she knows cannot hold out long?
1288 O you rogue! Your breast is to me what liquor is to those who rejoice in it, though it only gives them an unpleasant disgrace.
1289 Love is tender as an opening flower.$In season due to gain its perfect bliss is rapture known to few.
1290 She once feigned dislike in her eyes, but the warmth of her embrace exceeded my own.
1291 You see his heart is his alone$O heart, why not be all my own?
1292 O My soul! Although you have known him who does not love me, still do you go to him, saying "he will not be displeased."
1293 O My soul! Do you follow him at pleasure under the belief that the ruined have no friends?
1294 O My soul! You would not first seem sulky and then enjoy (him); Who then would in future consult you about such things?
1295 My soul fears when it is without him; it also fears when it is with him; it is subject to incessant sorrow.
1296 My mind has been (here) in order to eat me up (as it were) whenever I think of him in my solitude.
1297 I have even forgotten my modesty, having been caught in my foolish mind which is not dignified enough to forget him.
1298 My soul which clings to life thinks only of his (own) gain in the belief that it would be disgraceful for it to despise him.
1299 And who will aid me in my hour of grief,$If my own heart comes not to my relief?
1300 It is hardly possible for strangers to behave like relations, when one's own soul acts like a stranger.
1301 Let us witness awhile his keen suffering; just feign dislike and embrace him not.
1302 A little dislike is like salt in proportion; to prolong it a little is like salt a little too much.
1303 For men not to embrace those who have feigned dislike is like torturing those already in agony.
1304 Not to reconcile those who have feigned dislike is like cutting a faded creeper at its root.
1305 An increased shyness in those whose eyes are like flowers is beautiful even to good and virtuous husbands.
1306 Love without hatred is ripened fruit;$Without some lesser strife, fruit immature.
1307 A lovers' quarrel brings its pain, when mind afraid$Asks doubtful, 'Will reunion sweet be long delayed?'.
1308 What avails sorrow when I am without a wife who can understand the cause of my sorrow?
1309 Like water in the shade, dislike is delicious only in those who love.
1310 It is nothing but strong desire that makes her mind unite with me who can leave her to her own dislike.
1311 From thy regard all womankind Enjoys an equal grace;$O thou of wandering fickle mind, I shrink from thine embrace.
1312 One day we silent sulked; he sneezed: The reason well I knew;$He thought that I, to speak well pleased, Would say, 'Long life to you!'.
1313 Even if I were adorned with a garland of branch-flowers, she would say I did so to show it to another woman.
1314 When I said I loved her more than any other woman, she said "more than others, yes, more than others," and remained sulky.
1315 'While here I live, I leave you not,' I said to calm her fears.$She cried, 'There, then, I read your thought'; And straight dissolved in tears.
1316 When I said I had remembered her, she said I had forgotten her and relaxing her embrace, began to feign dislike.
1317 When I sneezed she blessed me, but at once changed (her mind) and wept, asking, "At the thought of which woman did you sneeze?".
1318 When I suppressed my sneezing, she wept saying, "I suppose you (did so) to hide from me your own people's remembrance of you".
1319 Even when I try to calm her jealous mind by soothing and coaxing, she is displeased and says, "This is the way you behave towards (other women)."
1320 Even when I look on her contemplating (her beauty), she is displeased and says, "With whose thought have you (thus) looked on my person?"
1321 Although my husband is free from defects, the way in which he embraces me is such as to make me feign dislike.
1322 His love will increase though it may (at first seem to) fade through the short-lived distress caused by (my) dislike.
1323 Is there a celestial land that can please like the feigned dislike of those whose union resembles that of earth and water?
1324 In prolonged dislike after an embrace there is a weapon that can break my heart.
1325 Though free from defects, men feel pleased when they cannot embrace the delicate shoulders of those whom they love.
1326 To digest what has been eaten is more delightful than to eat more; likewise love is more delightful in dislike than intercourse.
1327 Those are conquerors whose dislike has been defeated and that is proved by the love (which follows).
1328 Will I enjoy once more through her dislike, the pleasure of that love that makes her forehead perspire?.
1329 May the bright-jewelled one feign dislike, and may the night be prolonged for me to implore her!.
1330 Dislike adds delight to love; and a hearty embrace (thereafter) will add delight to dislike.
